urable impression which existed against the climate of
the island, as affecting Europeans.

At the same time, however, that Java has to boast this general
character of high salubrity, comparatively with other tropical
climates, it is not to be denied that there are some spots upon
it which are decidedly unhealthy. These are to be found along the
low swampy marshes of the northern coast, which are mostly recent
encroachments upon the sea: the principal of these is Batavia, the long
established capital of the Dutch eastern empire.

The climate of this city has ever been considered as one of the most
baneful in the world. It has even been designated the storehouse of
disease; with how much justice, is too woefully demonstrated by the
writings of those visitors who have survived its perils, and the
records of the Dutch East-India Company itself. If we may credit
Raynal,[29] there perished between the years 1714 and 1776, in the
hospitals of Batavia, above eighty-seven thousand sailors and soldiers.
From the table, No. 1, imperfect as it is, on account of the loss of
many of the registers at the period of the British conquest, it will be
seen what a large proportion the deaths bore to the whole population;
and from the table, No. 2, of the same Appendix, discovered among the
Dutch records, it appears further, that the total amount of deaths in
this city, from the year 1730 to the year 1752, was in twenty-two years
more than a million of souls.

To those who are acquainted with the manner in which the affairs of
the Dutch East-India Company were managed abroad, there will perhaps
be no difficulty in laying rather at the door of the colonists, than
of the nation, the crime of maintaining a commercial monopoly, at such
a dreadful expence of lives as resulted from confining the European
population within the narrow walls of this unhealthy city. That the
sacrifice was made for that object, or to speak more correctly, under
that pretext, for the private interests of the colonists who were
entrusted with its details, can scarcely be doubted. From the moment
the walls of the city were demolished, the draw-bridges let down, and
free egress and ingress to and from the country was permitted, the
population began to migrate to a more healthy spot, and they had not
to go above one or two miles beyond the precincts before they found
themselves in a different climate. But this indulgence, as it gave the
inhabitants a purer air, so it gave them a clearer insight into the
resources of the country, and notions of a freer commerce, which, of
all things, it was the object of the local government and its officers
to limit or suppress.

Necessity might have first determined the choice of the spot for the
European capital; but a perseverance in the policy of confining the
European population within its walls, after so many direful warnings
of its insalubrity, cannot but lead to the inference, that either the
monopoly of the trade was considered a greater object to the nation
than the lives of the inhabitants, or that the more liberal views of
the government were defeated by the weakness or corruption of its
agents.

Of the vegetable and animal kingdoms, as of the mineral, we shall
content ourselves with such an account as may be necessary to convey
to the reader a general notion of the nature of the country and its
resources, referring the man of science to the intended publication of
Dr. Thomas Horsfield, a gentleman whose sole attention has, for the
last seven years, been directed to the natural history of Java.

Java is distinguished not only by the abundance of its vegetation,
but by its extraordinary variety. Upwards of a thousand plants are
already contained in the herb-area of Dr. Horsfield, of which a large
proportion are new to the naturalist. Between the tops of the mountains
and the sea-shore, Java may be considered as possessing at least six
distinct climates, each furnishing a copious indigenous botany, while
the productions of every region in the world may find a congenial spot
somewhere in the island.

Vegetable productions, which contribute to the food and sustenance of
man, are found in great variety. Of these the most important is rice,
which forms the staple grain of the country, and of which there are
upwards of a hundred varieties. Maize, or Indian corn, ranks next, and
is principally cultivated in the higher regions, or in those tracts
where the soil is unfavourable to the rice cultivation. The bean, or
_káchang_, of which there are many varieties, is an important article
of food. Of the sugar-cane, which is used by the natives only in its
raw state, they distinguish eight varieties, an account of which, as
well as of the cultivation of coffee, pepper, indigo, tobacco, &c. will
be found in the chapter on agriculture. Aniseed, _múngsi_, cummin-seed,
_márícha_ (black pepper), _chábi jáwa_ (long pepper), _kumúkus_
(cubebs), socha dolichos, and _mendéking_, plants of considerable
importance, may be considered as indigenous to the island, and are
collected for various uses in diet and medicine.

Besides the cocoa-nut and other productions more generally known,
there are many trees growing spontaneously, of which the seeds and
kernels are used as food; the principal of these are the _peté_,
_jéngkol_, and _kómlandíngan_, several species of the mimosa, and the
_púchang_ and _kamíri_. The bread-fruit tree grows on Java, and is of
the same species (although inferior in quality) with that of the South
Sea Islands: but the fruit is comparatively very little esteemed or
employed as an article of food.

Of tuberous roots, besides those furnished from the principal genera,
convolvulus, dioscorea, and arum, are those from the _bangkwang_
(dolichos bulbosus), the roots of which are much esteemed by the
natives, and the _kéntang jáwa_ (ocymum tuberosum) or Java potatoe.
Most of the numerous varieties of the convolvulus and dioscorea, which
furnish food for the natives, have been enumerated in one of the first
volumes of the Batavian Transactions. The jatropha manihot, called _úwi
blanda_, or _wúdo_, has been propagated through all parts of Java, and
is found growing in the hedges.

The true sago of Amboina and the Eastern Islands, is found only
solitary in a few low and marshy situations, and the preparation
of it from the pith of the tree is not known to the inhabitants of
Java: the leaves only are employed for covering houses; but from the
_áren_, or sagurus rumphii, which grows abundantly in every part of
the island, and on account of its variously extensive uses, ranks next
in importance to the cocoa-nut, a substance is prepared, similar in
all respects to the true sago of the Eastern Islands. The tops of
various trees of the palm kind, which are sought after in other parts
of the East as food, are, on account of the abundance of rice and other
esculent vegetables, but little regarded in Java; but the young shoots
of many varieties of the _bambu_ are used in the diet of the natives.
Wheat and potatoes, with almost every species of European vegetables,
are cultivated with success. Of the oil-giving plants a particular
account will be given when describing the agriculture of the country.

Java, in common with the Malayan islands in general, abounds in
indigenous fruits. "No region of the earth," observes Mr. Marsden,
"can boast an equal abundance and variety of indigenous fruits." The
_mangústin_, which on account of its acknowledged pre-eminence amongst
Indian fruits, has been termed the pride of these countries; the
_durian_, or _dúren_, to which the natives of these islands are so
passionately attached; the _rámbutan_, the _lánseh_ or _lánseb_, with
an extensive variety of the jack, the mango, the plantain, the guava,
the pine-apple, the papaw, the custard-apple, the pomegranate, and
almost every species of fruit which grows within the tropics, are here
found in the greatest variety. The tamarind tree is general. The island
also produces many kinds of oranges, citrons, lemons, and in particular
the pumplemous (known in Bengal under the name of the Batavian lembu,
or lime, and in the West Indies as the shaddock), besides the _sáwu_,
_klédung_, _pachítan_, and a variety of others, not generally known
to Europeans, but well calculated for the table. Of the mango, at
least forty varieties are enumerated; the wild raspberry, which is
found in the higher regions, is not destitute of flavour; one kind, in
particular, with dark violet-coloured fruit, approaches in taste to the
European species. In some of the mountainous tracts are to be found
peaches, Chinese pears, and some other fruits imported from Japan, the
Cape of Good Hope, and China.

Among innumerable flowers which bloom in perpetual succession
throughout the year, and impregnate the air of these countries with
their fragrance, those of the _champáka_, _tán-jong_, _meláti_,
_kanáng'a_ and _nágasári_, hold the first rank; they are used by the
natives in the ornament of their persons, and are remarkable for their
fragrance. The myrtle and rose are found in the gardens of Europeans.
A great variety of ornamental trees and shrubs, many of them overlooked
in the catalogues of Rhumphius and Van Rheede, have been noticed, as
deserving cultivation for their utility as well as beauty.

The medicinal plants of Java have been described in an account
published in the Batavian Transactions: among these are many which
are employed in the daily practice of the natives, of which a large
proportion have not been subjects of investigation or experiment
by Europeans, and others which had not previously been botanically
described or classed. In a country hitherto imperfectly explored,
and abounding in profuse vegetation, it was natural to calculate on
the discovery of many useful medicinal plants; and among upwards of
sixty, described, for the first time, by Dr. Horsfield, he particularly
notices several, as likely to become most valuable articles in general
medicinal practice.

Besides abundance of coir, termed _sepét_ by the natives, prepared from
the fibres which surround the cocoa-nut, and gamuti (called _duk_),
prepared from those of the _áren_ tree, both of which are well known,
another species of palm, the _gebáng_, also yields valuable ropes,
the fibre of which is obtained from the large petioles or stalks of
the leaves by pounding and beating. Intelligent natives assert, that
ropes prepared from these are particularly valuable, exceeding in
strength all other kinds of equal size. The fibres and ropes are called
_bas_. The cotton shrub (gossypium herbaceum) is universal; and hemp,
though its uses are unknown to the Javans, is found in the gardens
of foreign settlers. Besides these, the island affords various kinds
of vegetables, the fibrous bark of which is made into thread, rope,
cloth, &c.; but they are never cultivated, and when required for use
are collected in their wild state. The general denomination, in the
Javan language, of the internal bark of all vegetables which can be
manufactured into cords, thread, &c. is _lúlub_. This being freed, by
beating or maceration, from the adhering particles of the exterior
bark, yields the fibrous substance, which is twisted by the most simple
process, commonly by the hands alone. The trees which afford the
_lúlub_ are the _wáru_, which is very abundant, and is manufactured
into ropes for all common domestic purposes; the _melínju_, the bark
of which is called _bágu_; and the _béndo_, which affords ropes of
superior strength and durability.

Of the bambusa, the _pring-ápus_, the stem of which may be considered
arborescent, furnishes the cheapest ropes. These are made with great
expedition, being split into thin strips, which are twisted on the spot
into cords fit for all common purposes, although they are serviceable
only for a few days. They are uniformly used, in travelling, for
securing baggage, &c. Among shrubs principally employed for these
purposes are the _werúng_, _urís-urísan_, _dalúmpang_, _che-plákan_
and _glúgo_; among plants, the _widúri_ and _rámi_; the fibres of the
latter afford very strong and durable cords, which are chiefly employed
for nets or lines, and used in fishing: they greatly resemble the
sunn of western India, and would probably be found to answer the same
purpose, as well in furnishing the bags called in India gunny-bags,
for the transportation of goods, as for the manufacture of paper in
Europe. This remark applies also to the _lúlub_ of several of the other
shrubs mentioned. Several species of _písang_ or plantain yield the
materials for ropes and cords of various fineness, according to the
methods employed in preparing them. In the Manilla Islands, cables
are made from these fibres; and in the first volume of the Batavian
Transactions a mode is described of preparing from them a substance
resembling cotton. The leaves of the '_nanas_, or pine-apple, contain
also abundance of useful fibres, which are easily separated in a
bundle, after scraping off the coriaceous substance. It is very fine,
and the separate fibres are employed by the natives in sewing without
any preparation; but it may also be spun, and is made into a kind of
stuff resembling silk, gauze, &c.

Mats are made from several species of pandanus, from a kind of grass
called _méndong_, and from the leaves of various palms, particularly
the _gebáng_. The latter affords the most common kinds, coarser and
less durable than the others, as well as bags (straw sacks) resembling
very coarse mats.

The paper in common use with the Javans is manufactured from the
_glúgo_, (morus papyrifera.)

A variety of vegetable substances are used in dyeing: the principal
of which, however, are the _tom_, or indigo, which is extensively
cultivated throughout the island; and the _wong-kúdu_, which affords
a lasting scarlet. A black dye is obtained from the bark of several
exotic trees, united with the rind of the _mangústin_ fruit. A yellow
dye is also obtained from an exotic wood, heightened by the addition of
the bark of the _nángka_ tree, and a variety of the mango.

Extensive forests of the _játi_, or teak of India[30], are found in
almost all the eastern provinces; but the most valuable and important
are in the central districts, situated inland, between _Semárang_ and
_Sidáyu_, and particularly in the districts of _Blóra_, _Jípang_, and
_Padáng'an_.

Of the teak tree there is but one species known, the tectona grandis
of Linnæus, the tekka of Van Rheede, and the jatus of Rhumphius.
Its natural history has been already fully detailed, and all the
kinds generally enumerated are merely varieties. These are usually
distinguished among the natives of Java by names derived from the
quality and colour of the wood. The principal are the _játi kápur_,
the chalky teak, and a kind varying in colour, and on account of
its excellence termed _játi súng'gu_, or the true teak. The former
is the most common: its wood is of a whitish hue, and it sometimes
contains calcareous concretions in nodules or streaks. This sort is
chiefly employed for common domestic purposes, and though inferior
in quality to many others, from its abundance and comparative
cheapness, is perhaps the most generally useful. The _játi súng'gu_
is harder, closer, and more ponderous, and particularly selected for
ship-building. The colour of the wood is of different shades, from
light to intense brown, with a cast of violet verging sometimes to red
or black. If the stem is covered with spines, or rather pointed scales,
it is called _játi dúri_, but in its texture and quality it agrees with
the _játi súnge'gu_. Besides these the natives distinguish, as _játi
gémbol_, those excrescences or protuberances which are produced from a
variety of the _játi_, furnishing materials for handsome cabinet-work.

The teak tree on Java grows at a moderate elevation above the level
of the ocean. It is generally conceived, that the timber afforded by
forests growing on a soil of which the basis is limestone, and the
surface uneven, gravelly, or rocky, is the hardest, the freest from
chalky concretions, and in all respects the best; but in laying out
a teak plantation, a soil consisting in a great proportion of black
vegetable mould, is always selected for the purpose of obtaining a
rapid growth. The teak tree is slender and erect. It shoots up with
considerable vigour and rapidity, but its expansion is slow. Like all
other trees affording useful timber of a close grain, it is many years
in arriving at maturity. Under favourable circumstances, a growth of
from twenty to twenty-five years affords a tree having about twelve
inches diameter at the base. It requires at least a century to attain
its perfection, but for common purposes, it is usually felled when
between thirty and fifty years old[31].

Notwithstanding the extent to which cultivation has been carried in
many districts of the island, large portions of its surface are still
covered with primeval forests, affording excellent timber of various
descriptions. Besides the teak, there are several kinds of wood or
timber employed for various domestic purposes, as the _súren_ (the tuna
of Bengal), of which the wood is very light, stronger and more durable
than all other kinds of similar weight produced on the island: as the
grain is not fine, it is not employed in making furniture, but it is
useful for chests, trunks, carriages, &c.; its colour is red, and its
odour somewhat resembling that of the cedar. Its weight is probably
inferior to that of the larch.--The _wúngú_ or _ketángi_ is often used
instead of teak: the grain is somewhat finer: when in full blossom it
is perhaps the most beautiful tree existing.--The _wádang_ or _báyur_,
a light and tolerably durable wood, is employed for masts and spars
of small vessels; but the surface must be well covered with resinous
substances to prevent its splitting.--The _gintúngan_ is employed in
the same manner, but grows to a larger size; the colour of the wood
and bark is red.--The _lampéan_ or _lában_ is light but durable, and
affords materials for the handles of the spears or pikes borne by the
natives.--The _nángka_ abounds in several districts where teak is not
found, and is almost exclusively used in the construction of houses,
and other domestic purposes: the wood is more close and ponderous
than the _súren_, which it otherwise resembles; it takes a tolerable
polish, and is sometimes employed for furniture. The colour is yellow;
but it is made to receive a brownish hue, by the application of the
young teak-leaves in polishing: its bark is used as a yellow dye.--The
_lúren_ resembles the _nángka_, but is generally of rare occurrence,
though in some tracts it furnishes the only timber: its use in the
neighbouring islands, particularly on Sumatra, is well known.--The
_kusámbi_ is uncommonly heavy, hard, and close: it supplies anchors for
small vessels, blocks, pestles, and numerous similar utensils.--The
_sáwur_ is a very beautiful and useful wood; the colour resembles that
of mahogany, but the grain is closer, and it is more ponderous: its
chief use is for handles of tools for carpenters and other artificers,
for machinery, especially for the teeth of the wheels of mills, and
other purposes where a hard and durable wood is required. On account of
its scarcity, it is uniformly cut down on Java before it arrives at
the necessary size for cabinet-work. Forests of it grow on the hills
of _Báli_, opposite the Javan shore, whence it is brought over by
boat-loads for sale.

The _pílang_ is a very hard wood, and employed in the eastern
districts, instead of lignum-vitæ, for the construction of
ships'-blocks, &c.--The _pung_ is equally hard, and uniformly employed
by the natives for pegs in constructing their _prahus_.--The _wáli
kúkun_ is equal to the _kusámbi_ in weight, and exceeds it in hardness:
it is employed for anchors, naves of wheels, machinery, &c.--The
_tang'gulun_ is a hard wood of a close grain, and employed by turners
for various small works.--The _kelúmpit_ is a very large tree: sections
are employed by the natives for cart wheels.--The _járan_ is a white
wood taking the tool easily: the natives prefer it to all others
for the construction of their saddles, which consist principally of
wood.--The _demólo_ affords a light wood, which is made into planks,
and employed where durability is not much required.--The wood of the
_kedáwung_ is whitish and moderately hard.--The _lában_ is a yellowish
and hard wood: it is employed for the handles of axes and various
utensils.--The _jánglot_ is considered by the natives as the toughest
wood produced in the island, and is always employed for bows when
procurable: the tree is of a moderate size.--The _béndo_ is a light
wood, useful for canoes.--The _séntul_ is a light close-grained wood,
and easily worked: it resembles the _súren_.

For household furniture, cabinet-ware, &c. are employed--the _sóno
kling_ of the _Maláyus_, the colour of which is a deep brown,
inclining to black:--the _sóno kómbang_, which has some resemblance
to the _lingua_ wood of the Moluccas:--the _war'm-lot_, dark brown;
and _próno-sodo_, resembling the walnut, both scarce:--the _wer'n_,
of a brown colour, of a close substance and light, abundant in some
districts:--the _mentáus_ and _júmberit_, the wood of which is white
and fine-grained, uniformly used for inlaying:--the _randu kúning_,
yellowish and close-grained:--and the _íng'as_, of a brownish red
colour, and very brittle.

For the hilts and sheaths of krîses, the natives make use of the
_timóko_, of which the black and white variegated fragments are called
_pélet_. These are of various kinds.--The _arúman_, variegated white
and black, is also employed for canes, handles, and spears, &c.
and is very heavy.--The _tiké_, yellowish, closed and marble,--the
_mángu_,--the _áti áti_,--the _kráminan_,--the _púrwo-kúning_ and
several others, are employed for the same purposes.--The _kamúning_ is
of a brownish colour and very fine grain:--the _tayúman_ resembles the
last and is very much esteemed:--the _wúni stelágo_ affords a reddish
wood.

Among the most extensively useful productions ought not to be forgotten
the _bámbu_, or _príng_, which abounds on Java, and seems, from the
greater luxuriance and variety by which it is here distinguished, to
find the soil and climate more congenial to its growth than those of
any other country. It blossoms in different parts of the island. The
rattans (_rótan_) of Java are on the whole inferior to those of Sumatra
and Borneo: the improved state of cultivation is unfavourable to their
growth and propagation.

Many woods afford excellent fuel. The charcoal prepared from the
_kusámbi_ is equal perhaps to that of any other wood with which we are
acquainted, and is universally preferred in cooking, and in the other
branches of domestic economy. Charcoal, for gunpowder, is uniformly
prepared from the celtis orientalis, called _áng'grung_.

Among the useful trees must be noticed: the soap-tree, of which the
fruit is used to a very great extent in washing linen:--the _kasémak_,
from the bark of which is made a varnish for umbrellas:--the _sámpang_,
from the resin of which the natives prepare a shining varnish for the
wooden sheaths of krîses:--the cotton-tree, from which a silky wool is
obtained for stuffing pillows and beds:--the wax-tree, which, though
scarce on Java, grows abundantly on some parts of Madúra: (the kernel,
by expression, produces an oil, which some time after becomes hard
and bears a resemblance to wax; it may be burnt in lamps or converted
into candles, and affords an agreeable odour): the _bendúd_, a shrub
producing the substance of which the elastic gum, commonly called
Indian-rubber, is prepared. The art of preparing it in this form is
however unknown in Java. Torches are made of it, for the use of those
who search for birds' nests in the rocks, and it serves for winding
round the stick employed to strike musical instruments, as the _gong_,
&c. to soften the sound. The _mínyak káwon_ or _niátu_ is a very
useful tree, which grows solitary in all, and abundantly in some parts
of the island, and produces a kind of tallow.

_Dámar_, or resin, is distinguished by the inhabitants of these
countries into two kinds: _dámar-bátu_ or _séla_, and _dámar-puti_,
comprising numerous varieties obtained from different trees. None of
these are, however, produced on Java. Besides the _rásamála_, which is
very limited as to its place of growth, the _Canáram_, and a peculiar
resin employed by the natives for varnishing the wooden sheaths of
their krîses, called _sámpang_, few odoriferous resins are found. The
camphor-tree, which abounds on Sumatra and Borneo, is unknown on Java.
The wood oil, distinguished among the Malays by the name of _krúwing_
(which in Java is applied to all resinous or oily substances employed
in the construction of vessels), is not a native of Java, but it grows
abundantly on Banka and Sumatra.

None of what are called the finer kinds of spices, namely, the nutmeg,
clove, and cinnamon, are indigenous to Java; but the few trees which
have been planted in the gardens of Europeans have thriven well: and,
from the nature of the soil and climate, there seems little doubt that
the nutmeg and clove, in particular, might be extensively cultivated
throughout the island, did it suit the policy of the European
government to admit of their general introduction.

The vine was once extensively cultivated in some of the eastern
provinces of the island, in which the soil and climate appear well
calculated for its growth; but an apprehension, on the part of
the Dutch East-India Company, that its cultivation on Java might
interfere with the wine trade of the Cape of Good Hope, induced them
to discourage it, and the preparation of wine from the grape was
strictly prohibited. Lieutenant-Colonel Mackenzie, when noticing the
vast quantities of ashes thrown up from the different volcanos, makes
the following observation on the eastern part of Java. "The soil of
the country is evidently enriched by the ashes and earth emitted by
these eruptions, and there is reason to conclude, what persons well
acquainted with the south of Europe assert, that the vines of Italy
and the Cape would thrive in perfection, in a soil and climate so well
adapted to them."

Among the vegetable productions of Java, none has excited more interest
than the celebrated _úpas_, or poison-tree. Mr. Marsden, in his history
of Sumatra[32], has referred to various concurring authorities, in
refutation of the very extraordinary tales told of this tree; and, in
this general account of the productions of Java, it may perhaps be
sufficient to refer the reader to the particulars contained in the
subjoined note[33].

Of the useful or domestic quadrupeds it may be observed, that neither
the elephant nor the camel is a native of Java: the former is rarely
imported, the latter unknown. Neither the ass nor mule is found; but
the island has a fine breed of small horses (_járan_), strong, fleet,
and well made. A still finer breed is imported from _Bíma_, on the
neighbouring island of _Sumbáwa_, which by competent judges has been
said to resemble the Arab in every respect except size. They seldom
exceed thirteen hands, and in general are below this standard.

The bull and cow (_sápi_ or _lémbu_) are general, but much more so in
the central and eastern districts than in the western. The breed has
been greatly improved by the species introduced from continental India.
But the animal of most essential and general use in the agriculture
of the country is the buffalo (_kábu_, _maísa_, or _múnding_), a
particular account of which will appear in the chapter on Agriculture.
Goats (_wedús_) are numerous and of a small size: sheep (called here
European goats) are scarce and small. As in other sultry climates,
the latter have a coarse woollen coat, which is employed for stuffing
saddles, pillows, &c. but it is in so little request that the
inhabitants are rarely at the trouble of shearing for it. The hog
(_chéleng_) is reared principally among the Chinese.

Of beasts of prey may be enumerated several species of the tiger, as
the _máchan lóreng_ (felis tigris), _máchan gogor_ (a variety), _máchan
tútul_ (probably the small leopard of Pennant), _máchan kombang_ and
_kúwuk_, the smallest kind, called tiger-cats. The jackal, and several
varieties of the wild-dog; as the _ásu wáwar_, _ásu ájag_, or _ásu
kíki_; and among other wild quadrupeds, the rhinoceros, and _bánteng_,
or wild Javan ox, the wild-hog and the stag: the last, as well as the
rib-faced and axis deer, is tamed and fattened for food. The aggregate
number of mammalia on Java have been estimated at about fifty. The
habits and manners of the larger animals, the tiger, leopard, black
tiger, rhinoceros and stag, and two species of deer, the varieties of
the wild-hog, &c. are sufficiently known; but the _bánteng_, or Javan
ox, the Javan buffalo, the varieties of the wild-dog, those of the
weasel and squirrel, and most of the other smaller quadrupeds, still
present curious subjects for the study of the naturalist. Next to
the rhinoceros, which sometimes (though rarely at present) injures
plantations, the wild-hogs are the most destructive animals. They are
often poisoned (or intoxicated, according to the quantity they consume)
by the _kálák kámbing_, or by the remains from the preparation of
_brom_. The practice of suspending rags impregnated with urine, at
small distances around the plantations, is universal over the whole
island. These animals are said to have so violent an aversion to this
odour, that even this "feeble barrier" is useful in preserving the
plantations.

Musk, called _dedes_, is procured from the _rasé_.

Although the same qualities are ascribed to them here as in other
countries, bezoars are comparatively scarce in Java; and those
occasionally found in the maritime capitals are uniformly brought from
other countries. The hog-deer and Nicobar pigeon are not natives; and
although wild-hogs, in which bezoars are said to be found, are very
abundant, they are never examined or approached by the natives. Every
extraordinary concretion, calculus, ossification, &c. found in any part
of an animal, is called _mustíka_, which corresponds to the bezoar of
the Arabs, Persians, &c. A concretion of feathers found in the stomach
of a fowl is called _mustíka áyam_, and is carefully preserved. A
stony concretion, discovered accidentally by the rattling of a human
skull exposed for many years to the action of the sun, has been
denominated _mustíka órang_, and the most salutary virtues ascribed
to it. Analogous to the bezoars, must be considered the horns of the
rhinoceros, whose virtues are highly prized.

Among the domestic fowls, or poultry, are the turkey, which is
comparatively scarce, and chiefly raised for the tables of Europeans;
the goose, which is very common near all the establishments of
Europeans; the _bébek_, or duck, abundant in every part of the island;
the common fowl and pigeons. Among the birds of prey, the eagle is
not found; but there are several varieties of the falcon, of which
the _jóko wuru_ is the largest; also the carrion crow and the owl.
Of the parrot kind, two only, the _bétet_ and _selíndit_, are found
on Java. The peacock (_merák_), is very common in large forests. The
number of distinct species of birds has been estimated not greatly to
exceed two hundred, of which upwards of one hundred and seventy have
been described, and are already contained in the collections made on
account of the English East India Company.

The dorsal feathers of the white heron, and the vent feathers of the
_sándang láwé_, are employed, as substitutes for ostrich feathers, by
the natives, for plumes, &c. It is very rarely that the feathers of
geese, &c. are employed for beds or pillows, the silky cotton of the
_kápok_ being preferred on account of its coolness. For ornamenting the
arrows of the natives, the feathers of some of the falcon tribe are
chiefly employed.

Among the interesting subjects which still remain open for search,
are the habits and constitution of the hirundo esculenta, the small
swallow which forms the edible nests, annually exported in large
quantities from Java and the Eastern Islands for the Chinese market.
These birds not only abound among the cliffs and caverns of the south
coast of the island, but inhabit the fissures and caverns of several
of the mountains and hills in the interior of the country. From every
observation which has been made on Java, it has been inferred, that
the mucilaginous substance, of which the nests are formed, is not, as
has been generally supposed, obtained from the ocean. The birds, it
is true, generally inhabit the caverns in the vicinity of the sea, as
agreeing best with their habits, and affording them the most convenient
retreats for attaching their nests to; but several caverns are found
inland, at a distance of forty or fifty miles from the sea, containing
nests similar to those on the shore. From many of their retreats along
the southern coast, they have been observed to take their flight in
an inland direction, towards the pools, lakes, and extensive marshes
covered with stagnant water, as affording them abundance of their food,
which consists of flies, mosquitoes, gnats, and small insects of every
description. The sea that washes the foot of the cliffs, where they
most abound, is almost always in a state of the most violent agitation,
and affords none of those substances which have been supposed to
constitute the food of the esculent swallow. Another species of
swallow on this island forms a nest, in which grass or moss, &c. are
merely agglutinated by a substance, exactly similar to that of which
exclusively the edible nests consist. This substance, from whatever
part of these regions the nests be derived, is essentially uniform,
differing only in the colour, according to the relative age of the
nests. It exhibits none of those diversities which might be expected,
if it were collected casually (like the mud employed by the martin, and
the materials commonly employed in nest-making), and applied to the
rocks. If it consisted of the substances usually supposed, it would be
putrescent and diversified.

Dr. Horsfield thinks that it is an animal elaboration, perhaps a kind
of secretion; but to determine its nature accurately, it should be
carefully analyzed, the anatomy of the bird should be investigated, and
its character and habits watched.

The kayman of the Dutch, the _boáya_ of the Malays, and the _bóyo_
or _bájul_ of the Javans, which abounds along the shores and in the
principal rivers of the island, resembles more the crocodile of Egypt
than that of the Ganges, or the American alligator. The character of
the lacerta crocodiles, as given in the Systema Naturæ, applies to
the Javan crocodile, with this difference, that in the latter the two
crests of the tail coalesce towards the extremity, in which respect
it agrees with that of the Ganges; but its head and jaws are broad,
and rounded. In its manners, habits, and destructive qualities, it
resembles the largest animals of this genus. Next to the crocodile in
size is the _béwak_ of the Malays, or _menyáwak_ or _selíra_ of the
Javans. It sometimes attains the length of six or seven feet, and lives
near the banks of rivers and marshes. Its character agrees with those
of the lacerta monitor. It is erroneously denominated the guana by
Europeans. The eggs of this animal, as well as of the crocodile, are
eaten by the natives, and the fat is collected for medical purposes. A
small lizard, the _búnglon_ of the Javans, is erroneously called the
chameleon, in consequence of the property of changing its colour. It
has the specific characters of the guana, but is much smaller, seldom
exceeding eighteen or twenty inches in length. There are various other
lizards.

Two varieties of the turtle, _pényu_ and _pényu kombang_, are found
in the seas surrounding Java. Both yield the substance called
tortoise-shell, but they are seldom taken of sufficient size to render
it valuable: the flesh is excellent. Another kind, of which the species
is unknown, renders a thicker shell. _Kúro_ is the name of the common
land-tortoise, which is found very abundantly in particular districts.

Besides the rana esculenta, green frog (_kódok íjù_ of the Javans)
which is frequently eaten, and the _kódok benju_, there is the common
toad, _kódok_, and the _bánkong_ and _kíntel_. The frog-fish (rana
paradosa), or a variety of it, is also found on the island, and
has been exhibited in the same supposed metamorphosis as in other
countries. No noxious quality of any of these animals is here known.

It is uncertain whether the boa constrictor be found on Java. The
serpent usually called the _úlar sáwa_ is a species of coluber, and has
been described in one of the volumes of the Batavian Transactions; but
several other species are found which arrive at a very large size. One
of them, the _úlar lánang_, is very much dreaded by the natives, and
said to be poisonous. Of the _úlar sáwa_ there are several varieties,
one of which, _úlar sáwa máchan_, is most beautifully variegated.
Upwards of twenty serpents are enumerated as poisonous. The _úlar
lámpe_ is found at or near the discharge of large rivers into the
ocean, and is more abundant in some districts than in others. This is
greatly dreaded by the natives; its bite however is rarely mortal,
and the effects are comparatively slow, death seldom occurring within
twenty-four hours from the time of its infliction. No remedies which
deserve notice are known by the natives: charms and superstitious
applications are generally resorted to. The most remarkable serpent
is the _úlar kádut_, or _kárang_. The úlar lánang, and some of the
varieties _úlar sáwa_ are slender, and possess considerable agility.
According to the account of the natives, they frequently ascend trees,
and suspending themselves by the extremity of their tail, seize upon
small animals passing below; but the true _úlar sáwa_ of the Eastern
Javans is slow, thick, and unwieldy. Nothing which could illustrate its
supposed power of fascination has been noticed.

Of the fish most commonly used for food by the natives, many of which
are excellent and abundant, thirty-four species of river fish, seven
found chiefly in pools or stagnant waters, and sixteen sea fish, are
already enumerated by Dr. Horsfield. The classes of amphibia and
pisces, doubtless, afford many new subjects for investigation. Valentyn
enumerates five hundred and twenty-eight uncommon kinds of fish found
in the waters of the Eastern Islands.

Honey and wax are produced by three species of bees, inhabiting the
largest forests, but they are both collected in very inconsiderable
quantities. Bees are occasionally domesticated by the Arabs and Indians
near the large settlements, but never by the natives. Silk-worms were
once introduced by the Dutch near Batavia, but attention to them
did not extend among the natives. The chrysalis of the large atlas
affords a coarse silk, which is however not collected for use. To the
fruit, several insects, and to the corn while in the ear, a peculiar
species, generally known by the name of _wálang-sángít_, are most
destructive. The latter has in some years destroyed the growth of
whole districts, and occasioned partial scarcity. The natives attempt,
in some instances, to extirpate it by burning chaff and brimstone
in the fields. There are scorpions and centipedes, but their bite
is considered of little consequence: the natives generally apply a
cataplasm of onions to the wound. The class of insects affords many
new objects; specimens of most of the genus papilio, and many of other
genera have already been collected.

Java does not afford the same opportunities for beautiful collections
of shells as the Moluccas, Papua, and other Islands. Along the northern
coast, few shells are found of beauty or variety, and the corallines
have mostly lost their integrity by attrition; but the extensive bays
in the southern shore contain many of these objects in a state of
beauty and perfection.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] The primitive Athenians were called Iones or Iaones (Herodotus,
lib. i. &c.) This name is thought to have been given to them from
Javan, which bears a great resemblance to Ιάων. This Javan was the
fourth son of Japheth, and is said to have come into Greece after the
confusion of Babel, and seated himself in Attica; and this report
receives no small confirmation from the divine writings, where the
name of Javan is in several places put for Greece. See Daniel x. 20.
xi. 2. where the vulgar translations render it not Javan, as in the
original, but Græcia. The Athenians afterwards named Asia the less
_Ionia_.--Potter's Archæologia Græca.

[13] Panicum Italicum.

[14] The term _Zapagé_ or _Zabaja_ seems also to have been a corruption
from _Jawa_, and to have been used with the same latitude, according
to the following notices by Major Wilford. "There was a constant
intercourse, both by sea and land, between the kingdom of _Magad'hi_
and China, on the authority of Chinese history; and they traded to an
island and kingdom, called Founan, to the eastward of Siam, during the
third and fourth centuries. This was probably a Malay kingdom; but
we cannot ascertain its situation. It seems that the Malay emperors
and kings, as those of _Zapagi_ and _Founan_, did what they could to
introduce trade and learning into their dominions, but their exertions
proved ineffectual; at least they were not attended with much success;
and their subjects soon relapsed into their former mode of life." ...
"There are two countries called Maharaja, which are often confounded
together; the first, at the bottom of the Green Sea, including
Bengal and all the countries on the banks of the Ganges; the second
comprehended the peninsula of Malacca, and some of the adjacent islands
in the seas of China. In these countries the emperor, or king, always
assumed the title of Maharaja, even until this day. Their country,
in general, was called _Zapagé_ or _Zabaja_, which is a corruption
from _Java_ or _Jaba_, as it was called in the west, and was also the
name of Sumatra, according to Ptolemy, who calls it _Jaba-diu_, and
to Marco Polo. In the peninsula of Malacca was the famous emporium of
_Zaba_: Zubaja, in Sanscrit, would signify then _Zaba_. The empire of
_Zabajé_ was thus called, probably, from its metropolis, _Zaba_, as
well as the principal islands near it. _Zaba_ was a principal emporium
even as early as the time of Ptolemy. It remained so till the time of
the two Mussulman travellers of Renaudot, and probably much longer.
It is now called _Batu Sabor_, upon the river Jehor, which is as
large as the Euphrates, according to these travellers; who add, that
the town of Calabar, on the coast of Coromandel, and ten days to the
south of Madras, belonged to the Maharaja of Zabaje. The wars of this
Maharaja with the king of _Alkoner_ or countries near Cape Comorin, are
mentioned by the two Mussulman travellers in the ninth century, and
it seems that, at that time, the Malayan empire was in its greatest
splendor."--_Asiatic Researches_, vol. ix.

[15] Others again have derived the term _Jawa_ from _Yava_, which in
Sanscrit means barley, whence Java has occasionally been termed the
land of barley.

[16] Beschryving van _Groot Djawa_ of te _Java Major_ door F.
Valentyn.--Amsterdam, 1726.

[17] The breadth is a few miles less between Cheribon and the south
coast, occasioned by the deep bay of _Cheláchap_, and also in the
eastern termination of the island beyond Surabáya, where it only
averages forty-five geographical miles.

[18] The term _regencies_ is adopted from the title of Regent, given by
the Dutch to the chief native authority in each district.

[19] _Súra-kérta_ or _Sura-kérta di ning'rat_, is the name given to the
seat of empire; but as the capital was only removed to its present site
about the middle of the last century, it is still frequently called
_Solo_, the name of the village in or near which this capital was
established.

[20] This capital is indifferently turned _Yokya_, _Jokya_, _Juju_,
_'Ng'yug'ya_, or _Yug'ya-kerta_, and is the _Djojo-Carta_, according to
the Dutch orthography. The turn _Yug'ya_ has been selected, on account
of its nearer approximation to the supposed derivation of the word from
the _Na-yud-ya_ of the Ramayan.

[21] The height of the mountain _Arjúna_, in the eastern part of the
island, has been determined at 10,614 feet above the level of the sea;
and this mountain is by no means so lofty as those of _Semíru_ and
_Tegál_, the exact height of which has not yet been ascertained.

[22] The height of this mountain has been ascertained to be 5,263
English feet above the level of the sea.

[23] To the above general observations, which are made on the authority
of Dr. Horsfield, it may not be uninteresting to subjoin a more
particular account of two or three of the volcanos which have been
examined by that gentleman; those of _Tánkuban-Prahu_, _Papandáyang_,
and _Gúntur_ are, therefore, extracted from a paper published by Dr.
Horsfield in the Batavian Transactions.

  "TANKUBAN-PRAHU.--This mountain (which has derived its name from
  its appearance at a distance, resembling a _prahu_, or boat, turned
  upside down) forms a vast truncated cone. Its base extends to a
  very great distance, and it belongs to the largest mountains of
  the island, forming one of its most interesting volcanos. Although
  it has had no violent eruption for many ages, as is evident from
  the progress of vegetation, and from the depth of black mould
  which covers its sides, its interior has continued in a state of
  uninterrupted activity.

  "The crater is one of the largest, perhaps the largest, of the
  island. It has, in general, the shape of a funnel; but its sides
  are very irregular. The brim, or margin, which bounds it at the
  top, has also different degrees of elevation, rising and descending
  along the whole course of its circumference. The perpendicular
  depth at the side, where I descended (in the south), is at
  least two hundred and fifty feet: in the west the margin rises
  considerably higher. The regular circumference of the crater I
  estimate one English mile and nearly an half. The south side of the
  interior crater, near the top, is very steep. I found it impossible
  to descend, without the assistance of ropes tied to the shrubs at
  the margin. It consists here of small fragments of lava. About
  one-third of its depth it becomes more oblique or inclining, and
  the lower part consists of large piles of rocks, through which the
  descending streams of water have excavated a winding channel. The
  east side descends gradually about one-half of the depth, where
  it is terminated abruptly by a perpendicular pile of large rocks,
  which continues to the bottom. The north side is more gradually
  shelving than the others, and is partly covered with vegetation.
  The west side is one perpendicular pile of rocks. The nucleus of
  the mountain consists of large masses of basaltes, in which the
  volcanic opening is situated; and the sides exhibit piles and
  strata of this stone in every possible variety of configuration. In
  some places the rocks have the appearance of a regular wall, which
  is suddenly diversified by large fragments suspended apparently
  by a small base, and threatening to fall down every instant.
  Sometimes they rise in an oblique manner, and appear to have been
  disposed by art. But I shall not attempt a minute description of
  the disposition of the rocks and the strata which form the internal
  walls of the crater, which, without an accurate drawing, would be
  tedious and scarcely intelligible. The surface of the rocks which
  line the interior of the crater is completely calcined, generally
  of a white colour, sometimes inclining to grey or yellow. In many
  places small fragments of lava adhere to and cover the rocks of
  basalt: these are of different sizes, and of great variety of form
  and colour; but the most are calcined or burnt, or the surface like
  the rocks themselves. The different sides of the internal crater
  are excavated in many places, by furrows made by the descending
  water, which penetrate to a considerable depth, and expose more
  completely the interior basaltic composition. The bottom of the
  crater has a diameter of three hundred yards, but is not completely
  regular; its form depends on the gradual meeting of the sides
  below. Its surface is much diversified: it is strewed, like the
  sides, with immense blocks of basalt, the interstices between
  which are excavated, in a similar manner, by the streams of the
  descending water.

  "Near the centre, somewhat inclining to the west side, it contains
  an irregular oval lake, or collection of water, whose greatest
  diameter is nearly one hundred yards: it dilates into several
  branches. The water is white, and exhibits truly the appearance
  of a lake of milk, boiling with a perpetual discharge of large
  bubbles, which rise with greatest force from the eastern side.
  The heat is 112° of Fahrenheit's scale: the apparent boiling
  arises from a constant development of fixed air. The water has a
  sulphureous odour; its taste is astringent, somewhat saline. Shaken
  in a bottle it explodes its fixed air with great violence. The
  sides of the lake, to some distance, are lined by a white aluminous
  earth, most impalpably fine, and very loose, on which account it is
  very difficult to approach the water. In attempting to examine its
  temperature, and to collect for analysis, I sunk into the earth to
  a considerable distance, and found it necessary to dispose large
  fragments of basaltes before I was able to pass over it. This
  earth consists of the clay (alumine) of the lavas dissolved by the
  sulphureous steams on the bottom of the crater; it is of the purest
  kind, and divided to a degree minute almost beyond conception.
  Large quantities have been several times thrown out of the ancient
  craters of the island. One eruption of this substance occurred
  in the year 1761 from the mountain Gedé: it was considered as an
  eruption of ashes.

  "I was witness to a similar eruption, which occurred from the
  mountain of _Klut_, in the month of June last year. The earth very
  much resembled ashes, and was so impalpably fine and light, that
  the common breeze of the monsoon carried it from this mountain,
  situated in the longitude of Surabáya, to Batavia and farther
  westward. It possessed the properties of the purest clay, and being
  mixed with water became viscid and ductile. It can easily be formed
  into vessels, and if procurable in large quantities, might usefully
  be employed in the arts. All its properties indicated sufficiently
  that it was the alumine of the lavas, divided in an extreme
  degree by the causes above-mentioned. The Javanese are not wholly
  unacquainted with the properties of this earth. It is a custom
  amongst silversmiths to collect the ashes thrown out by similar
  eruptions, for the purpose of making _moulds_ for the finest works.

  "Towards the eastern extremity of the lake are the remaining
  outlets of the subterraneous fires: they consist of several
  apertures, from which an uninterrupted discharge of sulphureous
  vapours takes place. Two of these are larger than the rest; they
  are several feet distant from each other. The apertures are of an
  irregular oblong form, and covered with crystals of impure sulphur,
  which form from the discharged vapours, and adhere to those
  incrustations of the aluminous earth which have formed themselves
  in a great variety of configurations (hollows, tubes, &c.) near
  the apertures. The vapours rush out with incredible force, with
  violent subterraneous noises, resembling the boiling of an immense
  cauldron in the bowels of the mountain: their colour is white, like
  the concentrated vapours of boiling water. The apertures cannot be
  approached without the greatest danger, as their true extent cannot
  be discovered: they are surrounded by incrustations of sulphur
  adhering to delicate laminæ of the aluminous earth, which are
  extremely brittle. The greatest diameter of the large opening is
  nearly twelve inches.

  "To give an adequate description of the interior of this crater
  would furnish matter for an able pen: the force of the impression
  is increased, perhaps, by the recollection of the danger which
  has been overcome in descending to the bottom. Every thing here
  contributes to fill the mind with the most awful satisfaction. It
  doubtless is one of the most grand and terrific scenes which nature
  affords; and, in the present instance, the extent of the crater, as
  well as the remains of the former explosions, afforded a view and
  enjoyment which is not in my power to describe.

  "PAPANDAYANG.--The Papandáyang, situated on the western part of the
  district of Cheribon, in the province of _Suka-pura_, was formerly
  one of the largest volcanos of the island; but the greatest part
  of it was swallowed up in the earth, after a short but very severe
  combustion, in the year 1772. The account which has remained of
  this event asserts, that near midnight, between the 11th and 12th
  of August, there was observed about the mountain an uncommonly
  luminous cloud, by which it appeared to be completely enveloped.
  The inhabitants, as well about the foot as on the declivities of
  the mountain, alarmed by this appearance, betook themselves to
  flight; but before they could all save themselves, the mountain
  began to give way, and the greatest part of it actually _fell_ in
  and disappeared in the earth. At the same time, a tremendous noise
  was heard, resembling the discharge of the heaviest cannon. Immense
  quantities of volcanic substances, which were thrown out at the
  same time and spread in every direction, propagated the effects of
  the explosion through the space of many miles.

  "It is estimated, that an extent of ground, of the mountain
  itself and its immediate environs, fifteen miles long and full
  six broad, was by this commotion swallowed up in the bowels of
  the earth. Several persons, sent to examine the condition of the
  neighbourhood, made report, that they found it impossible to
  approach the mountain, on account of the heat of the substances
  which covered its circumference, and which were piled on each
  other to the height of three feet; although this was the 24th
  of September, and thus full six weeks after the catastrophe. It
  is also mentioned, that forty villages, partly swallowed up by
  the ground and partly covered by the substances thrown out, were
  destroyed on this occasion, and that 2,957 of the inhabitants
  perished. A proportionate number of cattle was also destroyed,
  and most of the plantations of cotton, indigo, and coffee, in the
  adjacent districts, were buried under the volcanic matter. The
  effects of this explosion are still very apparent on the remains
  of this volcano; but I defer an account of it, till I have had an
  opportunity of making a more minute examination.

  "GUNTUR.--The whole of the eastern part of this mountain is
  completely naked, and exposes to view, in a striking manner, the
  course of the lavas of the latter eruptions: the top is a regular
  cone, and covered with loose fragments of lava. I shall give a
  very concise abstract of the observations on the mountain, and on
  the different streams of lava which have lately flowed from its
  crater. I could distinctly trace, from the base of the conical top
  to the roots of the mountain, five different eruptions. The latest
  stream of lava which I examined (the mountain has since had a later
  eruption) was thrown out in 1800. Its course along the top cannot
  be distinctly observed, being completely covered with sand and
  small fragments of lava, which generally rise towards the end of an
  eruption. At the place where the stream first appeared distinctly,
  it was about five yards broad and completely even on the surface:
  having proceeded about twenty yards further it gradually widened,
  and was formed into a connected stream, higher in the middle, the
  sides tapering or inclining towards the top, forming a ridge with
  a pointed or sharp back. As the stream arrived at the foot of
  the mountain, it spread more and more, and pursued its course to
  the eastward, about six hundred yards over the adjacent country.
  Its greatest breadth, from north to south, is about one hundred
  and sixty yards, and it terminates abruptly by a rounded margin,
  consisting of large blocks of lava piled upon each other, nearly
  perpendicularly, to the height of fifteen to twenty feet.

  "This stream of lava, like all the others of later date which I
  have examined on the island, does not consist of a connected mass
  of fluid lava, united like a stream of melted metal; at least on
  the surface where it is exposed to view. It is made up of separate
  masses, which have an irregular (generally oblong or cubical)
  shape, and lie upon each other as 'loose disjointed clods,' in an
  immense variety of disposition. In some of these fragments I think
  I could observe a tendency to assume the regular basaltic figure.
  During its course down the steeps of the mountain, the stream,
  as has been observed, forms the long connected ridge (which has
  been described above, in the account of the volcanos, as generally
  covering the sides); but having arrived at the foot and spread
  more at large, these lumps of lava dispose themselves, in some
  instances, in plains, bounded by deep vallies: now they rise to
  a considerable height, and form a steep perpendicular eminence;
  then again they are piled upon each other more gradually, and
  appear rising by steps and divisions. But to give an accurate
  description of the arrangement of these fragments of lava would be
  unnecessarily prolix, and would require, to be clearly understood,
  a good drawing. In different places, the sulphureous vapours have
  forced their way through the interstices of the blocks of lava. The
  sides of their outlets (whose form is very irregular) is covered
  with a white calcareous crust; and the heat is so great, that small
  pieces of paper thrown into them are immediately singed.

  "This stream of lava is bounded on the north by another, of the
  same nature and disposition, thrown out of the mountain (according
  to an estimate made from the commencement and progress of
  vegetation upon it) about thirty years ago. In its course along
  the sides of the mountain it forms the same pointed ridges above
  described. It affords a plain demonstration of the manner in which
  the surface of lava is decomposed and rendered fit for vegetation.
  A third district of lava bounds the new stream first described in
  the south: it is more extensive than the others, and consists of
  several distinct regions, probably thrown out during one eruption
  (which appears to have been more violent than the others), but in
  successive periods shortly following each other. It extends farther
  to the eastward than the others, and covers a great portion of the
  foot of the mountain. Vegetation has already made considerable
  progress upon it: in the vallies between the separate streams of
  lava are found not only plants but also small shrubs. At one place,
  near the termination of this stream, the lava is piled up in two
  irregular ridges to the height of twenty feet; and at a small
  distance from its eastern extremity, in a spot which has escaped
  the effects of the later eruptions, and is covered by pleasant
  wood, are three different hot wells, within the circumference of a
  quarter of a mile. In the south, this district of lava is bounded
  by a recent stream, which appears to have been thrown out in 1800,
  by the same eruption which produced the first mentioned stream. It
  differs from the others only in the colour of its lava, which has
  a reddish hue: it is less considerable in extent than any of the
  others, and cannot be traced far from the foot of the mountain. The
  fifth stream of lava which I examined is still farther towards the
  south, and is one of the oldest which have been discharged from
  the eastern part of the crater. Near the foot of the mountain,
  vegetation has made greater progress than in any of the other
  districts of lava.

  "The colour of the recent lava of this mountain is jet-black or
  grey: one of the streams only has a reddish colour. Its texture is
  very loose, and its fracture very porous. The smaller fragments
  have much the appearance of the scoriæ of a blacksmith's forge: on
  being thrown against each other, they emit a sound like two bricks
  coming into contact. The interior crater of this mountain, as it
  has remained after the eruption of 1800, is less interesting than
  the others which I have examined. Its shape is somewhat oval, the
  greatest diameter being about one hundred yards: its depth is not
  very considerable. Its structure, in general, is similar to that of
  _Tankuban-prahu_. It has one remaining aperture, which discharges
  with great force hot sulphureous vapours."

                                       _Batavian Transactions_, vol. ix.



[24] Mineral wells, of various qualities, are found in almost
every part of the island. As an instance of the hot wells, the
following account of those found in Cheribon is selected. "At the
village of _Bongas_ (situated about ten miles to the north-east of
_Karang-Sambong_) I directed my route to the large mountain, in
order to examine part of the hills along its foot, called the hills
of _Pana-wangan_, and several hot wells which are found near their
borders. On approaching these hills, after a very gentle acclivity
covered entirely by calcareous stones, I very soon came to the spot
of the hot wells. They are found on a gently inclining plain, about
one hundred yards in circumference. This plain is perfectly white; and
on approaching it, it is perceived at some distance by a sulphureous
vapour, arising from the whole neighbourhood. The water springs from
several apertures, but their temperatures are not equal; the hottest
indicates the degree of one hundred and thirty of Fahrenheit's scale.
They all contain a very large quantity of calcareous earth in solution
and suspension, which coming into contact with the air, immediately
separates, and adheres to the surrounding objects, or is precipitated
to the ground. The branches of the shrubs in the vicinity are all
enveloped by a stalactical incrustation. The water from the different
wells gently descending the white calcareous plain, is collected in
a rivulet below. A large number of calcareous rocks are found in
the vicinity of the plains; some are covered with elegant crystals
of calcareous spar, others have a coralline appearance, and some
have the fracture of alabaster. On proceeding up the hills, immense
irregular blocks of calcareous rocks are found strewed about in the
valleys. About one hundred yards above this district are several wells
of naphtha, or petroleum. It rises in small plashes of water, about
twelve or eighteen inches in diameter, upon which it drives its black
specks, emitting the peculiar odour of the petroleum. The earth in the
circumference of these plashes is strongly impregnated with this oil:
it is very tough, and from that immediately bounding apertures, the
naphtha flows out on its being pressed; some portions exactly resemble
asphaltum. A considerable space of ground is occupied by these wells.
The stones are all calcareous. A few hundred yards above this spot, the
borders of the hills become very steep. I examined them to some extent.
They are composed exclusively of calcareous stones. Several extensive
stalactitic caves are found at no great distance above the wells;
they exhibit the usual appearances of calcareous caves and vaults.
The process of incrustation is continually going on. In some places,
deep perforations extend into the heart of the hills."--_Essay on the
Mineralogy of Java, by Dr. Horsfield. Bat. Trans._ vol. ix.

Among other objects of curiosity, which can only be illustrated by
particular description, are the explosions of mud, situated between
the district of Grobogan on the west, and of Blora and Jipang on the
east. By the natives they are termed Blédeg, and are described by Dr.
Horsfield as salt wells.

"These salt wells," he observes, "are dispersed through a district of
country several miles in circumference, the base of which, like that
of other parts of the island which furnish mineral and other saline
waters, is limestone. They are of considerable number, and force
themselves upwards, through apertures in the rocks, with some violence
and ebullition. The waters are strongly impregnated with sea-salt,
and yield upon evaporation very good salt for culinary purposes. (In
quantity not less than two hundred tons in the year.)

"About the centre of this limestone district, is found an extraordinary
volcanic phenomenon. On approaching it from a distance, it is first
discovered by a large volume of smoke rising and disappearing at
intervals of a few seconds, resembling the vapours arising from a
violent surf: a dull noise is heard, like that of distant thunder.
Having advanced so near, that the vision was no longer impeded by the
smoke, a large hemispherical mass was observed, consisting of black
earth, mixed with water, about sixteen feet in diameter, rising to
the height of twenty or thirty feet in a perfectly regular manner,
and as it were pushed up, by a force beneath; which suddenly exploded
with a dull noise, and scattered about a volume of black mud in every
direction. After an interval of two or three, or sometimes four or
five seconds, the hemispherical body of mud or earth rose and exploded
again. In the same manner this volcanic ebullition goes on without
interruption, throwing up a globular body of mud, and dispersing it
with violence through the neighbouring plain. The spot where the
ebullition occurs is nearly circular and perfectly level, it is
covered only with the earthy particles impregnated with salt water,
which are thrown up from below; the circumference may be estimated at
about half an English mile. In order to conduct the salt water to the
circumference, small passages, or gutters, are made in the loose muddy
earth, which lead it to the borders, where it is collected in holes dug
in the ground for the purpose of evaporation.

"A strong, pungent, sulphureous smell, somewhat resembling that of
earth-oil, is perceived on standing near the explosion; and the mud
recently thrown up possesses a degree of heat greater than that of the
surrounding atmosphere. During the rainy season these explosions are
more violent, the mud is thrown up much higher, and the noise is heard
at a greater distance.

"This volcanic phenomenon is situated near the centre of the large
plain which interrupts the large series of volcanos; and owes its
origin to the general cause of the numerous volcanic eruptions which
occur on the island." _Batavian Trans._ vol. ix.

"These salt wells, as Dr. Horsfield terms them, and other phenomena
connected with them, appear to be precisely of the same description as
the mud volcano at Macalouba, in Sicily, and the eruptions described by
Pallas, at Tainan and Kercha (the boundary of Europe to the south-east
of Little Tartary) and no doubt owe their origin to similar causes--the
extrication of gas, as well described by Dallas, in his Translation
of the History of Volcanos, by the Abbé Ordinaire," page 249. All the
phenomenon described in this work, as well in Sicily as at Tainan and
Kercha, are to be found in Java, where, on the hypothesis of the Abbé,
"the vitriolic acid liberating a great quantity of fixed air from the
salts with which this argillaceous and limy mass is impregnated, is
observed escaping copiously, by a general bubbling on the surface of
the plain, when the substances are sufficiently diluted by rain," &c.

On the hypothesis of the Abbé it may, therefore, be doubted whether
the assertion "that the Blédegs owe their origin to the general cause
of the numerous volcanos on the island, is correct." Pallas conceives
that the phenomenon at Kercha and Tainan may be explained by supposing
a deep coal mine to have been for ages on fire, that the sea broke in
upon it, that the water was turned into steam, and that the expansion
occasioned thereby, and the struggle of the different gases to get
free, force the upper surface, &c. but there seems no necessity for
admitting the action of fire; the mud he describes is only _luke-warm_,
this is precisely the case in Java.

It is remarkable that in Java, as in Sicily, in the vicinity of these
phenomena, "the country around is of calcareous earth; briny springs
and salt mines are found in the neighbourhood; some beds of oil of
petroleum are also observed floating on adjacent stagnant waters."

[25] The tradition is as follows:--"It is related, that in former
times the islands of Sumatra, Java, Bali, and Sumbawa were united, and
afterwards separated into nine different parts; and it is also said,
that when three thousand rainy seasons have passed away, they will be
reunited."

  The separation of the lands of Palembang (Sumatra) and Java
  took place in the Javan year                                      1114

  The separation of the lands of Bali and Balembangan on Java in    1204

  The separation of the lands of Giling Trawangán and Bali in       1260

  The separation of the island of Selo-Parang and Sumbawa in        1280

_See Chronological Table, under the head "History of Java."_



[26] In order to give the reader some idea of the tremendous violence
with which nature sometimes distinguishes the operations of the
volcano in these regions, and enable him to form some conjecture,
from the occurrences of recent experience, of the effects they may
have produced in past ages, a short account of the extraordinary and
wide-spread phenomena that accompanied the eruption of the Tomboro
mountain, in the island of Sumbawa, in April 1815, may not be
uninteresting. Almost every one is acquainted with the intermitting
convulsions of Etna and Vesuvius, as they appear in the descriptions
of the poet and the authentic accounts of the naturalist, but the most
extraordinary of them can bear no comparison, in point of duration
and force, with that of Tomboro. This eruption extended perceptible
evidences of its existence over the whole of the Molucca islands,
over Java, a considerable portion of Celebes, Sumatra, and Borneo,
to a circumference of a thousand statute miles from its centre, by
tremulous motions, and the report of explosions; while within the range
of its more immediate activity, embracing a space of three hundred
miles around it, it produced the most astonishing effects, and excited
the most alarming apprehensions. On Java, at the distance of three
hundred miles, it seemed to be awfully present. The sky was overcast at
noon-day with clouds of ashes, the sun was enveloped in an atmosphere,
whose "palpable" density he was unable to penetrate; showers of ashes
covered the houses, the streets, and the fields to the depth of several
inches; and amid this darkness explosions were heard at intervals, like
the report of artillery or the noise of distant thunder. So fully did
the resemblance of the noises to the report of cannon impress the minds
of some officers, that from an apprehension of pirates on the coast
vessels were dispatched to afford relief. Superstition, on the other
hand, on the minds of the natives, was busily at work, and attributed
the reports to an artillery of a different description to that of
pirates. All conceived that the effects experienced might be caused by
eruptions of some of the numerous volcanos on the island; but no one
could have conjectured that the showers of ashes which darkened the
air, and covered the ground of the eastern districts of Java, could
have proceeded from a mountain in Sumbawa, at the distance of several
hundred miles. Conceiving that it might be interesting and curious to
preserve an authentic and detailed account of the information that
could be gained of this wonderful phenomenon, while the event was still
recent and fully remembered, I directed a circular to the different
Residents, requiring them to transmit to the Government a statement of
the facts and circumstances connected with it, which occurred within
their own knowledge. From their replies, the narrative drawn up by Mr.
Assey, and printed in the ninth volume of the Batavian Transactions,
was collected; the following is an extract from that paper:--

"The first explosions were heard on this island (Java) in the evening
of the 5th of April: they were noticed in every quarter, and continued
at intervals until the following day. The noise was, in the first
instance, universally attributed to distant cannon: so much so,
that a detachment of troops was marched from Djocjocarta, under the
apprehension that a neighbouring post had been attacked; and along
the coast boats were in two instances dispatched in quest of supposed
ships in distress. On the following morning, however, a slight fall
of ashes removed all doubt as to the cause of the sound; and it is
worthy of remark, that as the eruption continued, the sound appeared
to be so close, that in each district it seemed near at hand, and was
generally attributed to an eruption either from the mountains Merapi,
Klut, or Bromo. From the 6th the sun became obscured; it had every
where the appearance of being enveloped in a fog. The weather was
sultry and the atmosphere close, and still the sun seemed shorn of its
rays, and the general stillness and pressure of the atmosphere seemed
to forebode an earthquake. This lasted several days. The explosions
continued occasionally, but less violently, and less frequently than
at first. Volcanic ashes also began to fall, but in small quantities,
and so slightly as to be hardly perceptible in the western district.
This appearance of the atmosphere continued, with little variation,
until the 10th of April; and till then it does not appear that the
volcano attracted much observation, or was considered of greater
importance than those which have occasionally burst forth in Java. But
on the evening of the 10th, the eruptions were heard more loud and
more frequent; from Cheribon eastward the air became darkened by the
quantity of falling ashes; the sun was nearly darkened; and in some
situations, particularly at Solo and Rembang, many said that they felt
a tremulous motion of the earth. It was universally remarked in the
more eastern districts, that the explosions were tremendous, continuing
frequently during the 11th, and of such violence as to shake the houses
perceptibly. An unusual thick darkness was remarked all the following
night, and the greater part of the next day. At Solo candles were
lighted at 4 p. m. of the 12th; at Mágelan in Kédu, objects could not
be seen at three hundred yards distance. At Grésik, and other districts
more eastward, it was dark as night in the greater part of the 12th
April, and this saturated state of the atmosphere lessened as the cloud
of ashes passed along and discharged itself on its way. Thus the ashes
that were eight inches deep at Bányuwángi were but two in depth at
Súmenap, and less in Grésik, and the sun does not seem to have been
actually obscured in any district west of Semárang.

"All reports concur in stating, that so violent and extensive an
eruption has not happened within the memory of the oldest inhabitant,
nor within tradition. They speak of similar effects, in a lesser
degree, when an eruption took place from the volcano of Karang Asam in
Bali, about seven years ago, and it was at first supposed that this
mountain was the seat of the eruption. The Balinese on Java attributed
the event to a recent dispute between the two Rajahs of Bali Baliling,
which terminated in the death of the younger Rajah by order of his
brother.

"The haziness and heat of the atmosphere, and occasional fall of
volcanic ashes, continued until the 14th, and in some parts of the
island until the 17th of April. They were cleared away universally
by a heavy fall of rain, after which the atmosphere became clear and
more cool; and it would seem that this seasonable relief prevented
much injury to the crops, and removed an appearance of epidemic
disease which was beginning to prevail. This was especially the case
at Batavia, where, for two or three days preceding the rain, many
persons were attacked with fever. As it was, however, no material
injury was felt beyond the districts of Banyuwángi. The cultivators
every where took precaution to shake off the ashes from the growing
paddy as they fell, and the timely rain removed an apprehension very
generally entertained, that insects would have been generated by the
long continuance of the ashes at the root of the plant. In Rembang,
where the rain did not fall till the 17th, and the ashes had been
considerable, the crops were somewhat injured; but in Banyuwángi,
the part of the island on which the cloud of ashes spent its force,
the injury was more extensive. A large quantity of paddy was totally
destroyed, and all the plantations more or less injured. One hundred
and twenty-six horses and eighty-six head of cattle also perished,
chiefly for want of forage, during a month from the time of the
eruption.

"From Sumbawa to the part of Sumatra where the sound was noticed, is
about nine hundred and seventy geographical miles in a direct line.
From Sumbawa to Ternate is a distance of about seven hundred and twenty
miles. The distance also to which the cloud of ashes was carried, so
quickly as to produce utter darkness, was clearly pointed out to have
been the island of Celebes and the districts of Grésik on Java: the
former is two hundred and seventeen nautical miles distant from the
seat of the volcano; the latter, in a direct line, more than three
hundred geographical miles."

The following is an extract from the reports of Lieutenant Owen
Phillips, dated at Bima on the island of Sumbawa. "On my trip towards
the western part of the island, I passed through nearly the whole of
Dompo and a considerable part of Bima. The extreme misery to which the
inhabitants have been reduced is shocking to behold. There were still
on the road-side the remains of several corpses, and the marks of where
many others had been interred: the villages almost entirely deserted
and the houses fallen down, the surviving inhabitants having dispersed
in search of food. The Rajah of Sang'ir came to wait on me at Dompo,
on the 3d instant. The suffering of the people there appears, from his
account, to be still greater than in Dompo. The famine has been so
severe that even one of his own daughters died from hunger. I presented
him with three coyangs of rice in your name, for which he appeared most
truly thankful.

"As the Rajah was himself a spectator of the late eruption, the
following account which he gave me is perhaps more to be depended
upon than any other I can possibly obtain. About 7 p. m. on the 10th
of April, three distinct columns of flame burst forth near the top of
the Tomboro mountain (all of them apparently within the verge of the
crater), and after ascending separately to a very great height, their
tops united in the air in a troubled confused manner. In a short time,
the whole mountain next Sang'ir appeared like a body of liquid fire,
extending itself in every direction. The fire and columns of flame
continued to rage with unabated fury, until the darkness caused by the
quantity of falling matter obscured it at about 8 p. m. Stones, at
this time, fell very thick at Sang'ir; some of them as large as two
fists, but generally not larger than walnuts. Between 9 and 10 p. m.
ashes began to fall, and soon after a violent whirlwind ensued, which
blew down nearly every house in the village of Sang'ir, carrying the
ataps, or roofs, and light parts away with it. In the part of Sang'ir
adjoining Tomboro its effects were much more violent, tearing up by the
roots the largest trees and carrying them into the air, together with
men, horses, cattle, and whatever else came within its influence. (This
will account for the immense number of floating trees seen at sea).
The sea rose nearly twelve feet higher than it had ever been known to
do before, and completely spoiled the only small spots of rice land
in Sang'ir, sweeping away houses and every thing within its reach.
The whirlwind lasted about an hour. No explosions were heard till the
whirlwind had ceased, at about 11 a. m. From midnight till the evening
of the 11th, they continued without intermission; after that time their
violence moderated, and they were only heard at intervals, but the
explosions did not cease entirely until the 15th of July. Of the whole
villages of Tomboro, Tempo containing about forty inhabitants is the
only one remaining. In Pekáté no vestige of a house is left: twenty-six
of the people, who were at Sumbawa at the time, are the whole of the
population who have escaped. From the most particular inquiries I have
been able to make, there were certainly not fewer than twelve thousand
individuals in Tomboro and Pekáté at the time of the eruption, of whom
only five or six survive. The trees and herbage of every description,
along the whole of the north and west sides of the peninsula, have been
completely destroyed, with the exception of a high point of land near
the spot where the village of Tomboro stood."

[27] Batavian Transactions, vol. viii. Introductory Discourse.

[28] See Appendix A.

[29] Raynal, vol i. page 293.

[30] It is remarkable that the teak tree, which, as far as our
information yet extends, is not to be found on the peninsula of
Malacca, or on Sumatra or the adjacent islands, should grow in
abundance on Java and several of the islands which lie east of it:
as on Madúra and its dependent islands, Báli, Sumbáwa, and others.
Sumbáwa produces a considerable quantity. The whole of the hills on the
north-east part of that island under Bíma are covered with it; but from
the constant demand for the timber, the trees are seldom allowed to
grow to more than a foot in diameter, except in the forests exclusively
appropriated to the use of the sovereign. In Dómpo, which occupies the
central division of the same island, the teak cannot be used by any
but the sovereign, and the trees are in consequence allowed to attain
their full size. The timber is here uncommonly fine, and by the natives
considered superior to that of Java; but the forests being surrounded
by steep hills, and the population but scanty, it cannot be transported
to the sea-coast without great labour and expense. On Celebes the
teak tree is only known in a few spots. The principal forest is in
the district of Mario; and this does not appear to be indigenous, as
the natives assert that the seed from which the forest has grown, was
brought from Java about eighty years ago by one of the sovereigns of
Tanété.

[31] The Dutch, apprehensive of a failure in the usual supply of teak
timber, have long been in the habit of forming extensive plantations of
this tree; but whether from a sufficient period not having yet elapsed
for the trial, or that the plantations are generally made in soils and
situations ill calculated for the purpose, experience, as far as it has
yet gone, has shown, that the trees which are left to the operations of
nature, attain to greater perfection, even in a comparatively barren
soil, unfit for any other cultivation, than those which are with great
care and trouble reared in a fertile land. Their wood is more firm,
more durable, and of a less chalky substance than that of the latter.

[32] Page 176, third edit.

[33] Although a serious refutation of the gross imposition practised on
the people of Europe, by the romance of Foersch on the subject of the
upas, or celebrated poison-tree of Java, may at this day be in a great
measure superfluous, as the world has long ceased to be the dupe of
his story, and as regular series of experiments have been instituted,
both in France and in England, to ascertain the nature and potency of
the poison; yet it may not be altogether displeasing to the reader to
see in this place an authentic account of the poison, as drawn out by
Dr. Horsfield at my request, and published in the seventh volume of
the Batavian Transactions. Almost every one has heard of its fabulous
history, which, from its extravagant nature, its susceptibility of
poetical ornament, its alliance with the cruelties of a despotic
government, and the sparkling genius of Darwin, whose purpose it
answered to adopt and personify it as a malignant spirit (in his Lives
of the Plants), has obtained almost equal currency with the wonders of
the Lerna Hydra, the Chimera, or any other of the classic fictions of
antiquity.

"Although the account published by Foersch, in so far as relates to
the situation of the poison-tree, to its effects on the surrounding
country, and to the application said to have been made of the upas on
criminals in different parts of the island, as well as the description
of the poisonous substance itself, and its mode of collection, has been
demonstrated to be an extravagant forgery,--the existence of a tree on
Java, from the sap of which a poison is prepared, equal in fatality,
when thrown into the circulation, to the strongest animal poisons
hitherto known, is a fact which is at present my object to establish
and illustrate. The tree which produces this poison is the anchar, and
grows in the eastern extremity of the island. The work of Rhumphius
contains a long account of the upas, under the denomination of arbor
toxicaria. The tree does not grow on Amboyna, and his description was
made from the information he obtained from Makasar. His figure was
drawn from a branch of what is called the male-tree, sent to him from
the same place, and establishes the identity of the poison-tree of
Makasar, and the other Eastern Islands, with the anchar of Java. The
simple sap of the arbor toxicaria (according to Rhumphius) is harmless,
and requires the addition of several substances, of the affinity of
ginger, to render it active and mortal. In so far it agrees with the
anchar, which, in its simple state, is _supposed_ to be inert, and
before being employed as a poison, is subjected to a preparation which
will be described after the history of the tree. Besides the true
poison-tree, the upas of the Eastern Islands, and the anchar of the
Javans, this island produces a shrub, which, as far as observations
have hitherto been made, is peculiar to the same, and, by a different
mode of preparation, furnishes a poison far exceeding the upas in
violence. Its name is chetik, and its specific description will succeed
to that of the anchar: the genus has not yet been discovered or
described.

"DESCRIPTION OF THE ANCHAR.--The anchar belongs to the twenty-first
class of Linnæus, the monoecia. The male and female flowers are
produced in catkins (amenta) on the same branch, at no great distance
from each other: the female flowers are in general above the male. The
characters of the genus are:--MALE flower; calix, consisting of several
scales, which are imbricate. Corol; none. Stamens; filaments many, very
short, covered with scales at the receptacle. The receptacle, on which
the filaments are placed, has a conical form, abrupt, somewhat rounded
above.--FEMALE flower; catkins, ovate. Calix; consisting of a number
of scales (generally more than in the male), containing one flower.
Corol; none. Pistil; germ single, ovate. Styles; two, long, slender,
and spreading. Stigmas; single and acute. Seed-vessel; an oblong drupe,
covered with the calix. Seed; an ovate nut, with one cell.

"SPECIFIC DESCRIPTION.--The anchar is one of the largest trees in the
forests of Java. The stem is cylindrical, perpendicular, and rises
completely naked to the height of sixty, seventy, or eighty feet.
Near the surface of the ground it spreads obliquely, dividing into
numerous broad appendages or wings, much like the canarium commune
(the canary-tree), and several other of our large forest trees. It is
covered with a whitish bark, slightly bursting in longitudinal furrows.
Near the ground this bark is, in old trees, more than half an inch
thick, and upon being wounded yields plentifully the milky juice from
which the celebrated poison is prepared. A puncture or incision being
made into the tree, the juice or sap appears oozing out of a yellowish
colour (somewhat frothy) from old, paler or nearly white from young
trees; exposed to the air, its surface becomes brown. The consistence
very much resembles milk: it is more thick and viscid. This sap is
contained in the true bark (or cortex), which, when punctured, yields
a considerable quantity, so that in a short time a cup-full may be
collected from a large tree. The inner bark (or liber) is of a close
fibrous texture, like that of the morus papyrifera, and when separated
from the other bark, and cleansed from the adhering particles,
resembles a coarse piece of linen. It has been worked into ropes, which
are very strong; and the poorer class of people employ the inner bark
of the younger trees, which is more easily prepared, for the purpose
of making a coarse stuff which they wear in working in the fields. But
it requires much bruising, washing, and a long immersion, before it
can be used, and when it appears completely purified, persons wearing
this dress being exposed to rain, are affected with an intolerable
itching, which renders their flimsy covering insupportable. It will
appear from the account of the manner in which the poison is prepared,
that the deleterious quality exists in the gum; a small portion of
which still adhering, produces, when exposed to wet, this irritating
effect: and it is singular, that this property of the prepared bark
is known to the Javans in all places where the tree grows, while the
preparation of a poison from its juice, which produces a mortal effect
when introduced into the body by pointed weapons, is an exclusive art
of the inhabitants of the eastern extremity of the island. The stem
of the anchar having arrived at the above-mentioned height, sends
off a few stout branches, which spreading nearly horizontally with
several irregular curves, divide into smaller branches, and form a
hemispherical, not very regular, crown. Previous to the season of
flowering, about the beginning of June, the tree sheds its leaves,
which reappear when the male flowers have completed the office of
fecundation. It delights in a fertile, not very elevated, soil, and is
only found in the largest forests. One of the experiments to be related
below was made with the upas prepared by myself. In the collection of
the juice I had some difficulty in inducing the inhabitants to assist
me; they feared a cutaneous eruption and inflammation, resembling
(according to the account they gave of it) that produced by the ingas
of this island, the rhus vernix of Japan, and the rhus radicans of
North America. The anchar, like the trees in its neighbourhood, is
on all sides surrounded by shrubs and plants: in no instance have I
observed the ground naked or barren in its immediate circumference. The
largest tree I met with in Balambangan, was so closely environed by the
common trees and shrubs of the forest in which it grew, that it was
with difficulty I could approach it. Several vines and climbing shrubs,
in complete health and vigour, adhered to it, and ascended to nearly
half its height; and, at the time I visited the tree and collected the
juice, I was forcibly struck with the egregious misrepresentation of
Foersch. Several young trees spontaneously sprung from seeds that had
fallen from the parent, put me in mind of a line in Darwin's Botanic
Garden:--

             'Chain'd at his root two scion-demons dwell;'

while in recalling his beautiful description of the upas, my vicinity
to the tree gave me reason to rejoice that it was founded in fiction.

"DESCRIPTION OF THE CHETIK.--The fructification of the chetik is still
unknown: after all possible research in the district where it grows,
I have not been able to find it in a flowering state. It is a large
winding shrub. The root extends creeping a considerable distance
parallel to the surface, sending off small fibres at different curves,
while the main root strikes perpendicularly into the ground. The stem,
which in general is shrubby, sometimes acquires the size of a small
tree. The poison is prepared from the bark of the root. The chetik
grows only in close, shady, almost inaccessible forests, in a deep,
black, fertile vegetable mould. It is very rarely met with even in the
wildernesses of Balambangan.

"PREPARATION OF THE POISON FROM THE ANCHAR.--This process was performed
for me by an old Javan, who was celebrated for his superior skill in
preparing the poison: about eight ounces of the juice of the anchar,
which had been collected the preceding evening in the usual manner, and
been preserved in the joint of a bambu, was carefully strained into
a bowl. The sap of the following substances, which had been finely
grated and bruised, was carefully expressed and poured into it, viz.
arum (nampu), kempferia galanga (kenchur), anomum (bengli) a variety
of zerumbed, common onion and garlic, of each about half a drachm. The
same quantity of finely powdered black pepper was then added, and the
mixture stirred. The preparer now took an entire fruit of capsicum
fruticosum or Guinea pepper, and having opened it, he carefully
separated a single seed, and placed it on the fluid in the middle of
the bowl. It immediately began to reel round rapidly, now forming a
regular circle, then darting towards the margin of the vessel, with a
perceptible commotion on the surface of the liquor, which continued
about one minute. Being completely at rest, the same quantity of pepper
was again added, and another seed of the capsicum laid on as before.
A similar commotion took place in the fluid, but in a less degree,
and the seed was carried round with diminished rapidity. The addition
of the same quantity of pepper was repeated a third time, when a seed
of the capsicum being carefully placed in the centre of the fluid,
remained quiet, forming a regular circle about itself in the fluid,
resembling the halo of the moon. This is considered as a sign that the
preparation of the poison is complete.

"PREPARATION OF THE POISON FROM THE CHETIK.--The bark of the root
is carefully separated and cleared of all the adherent earth, a
proportionate quantity of water is poured on, and it is boiled about
an hour, when the fluid is carefully filtered through a white cloth;
it is then exposed to the fire again, and boiled down to nearly the
consistence of an extract; in this state it much resembles a thick
syrup. The following spices, having been prepared as above described,
are added in the same proportion as to the anchar, viz. kempferia
galanga (kenchur), (súnti), anomum zingéber (shai), common onion,
garlic, and black pepper. The expressed juice of these is poured into
the vessel, which is once more exposed to the fire for a few minutes,
when the preparation is complete. The upas of both kinds must be
preserved in very close vessels."

Dr. H. then details the particulars of twenty experiments made on
different animals with these poisons, as well in their simple state
as procured from the bark, powerfully prepared in the manner as above
stated, in which the violence of the poison was manifested; and
concludes with some general observations, from which the following are
extracted:

"The operation of the two different poisons on the animal system is
essentially different. The first seventeen experiments were made with
the anchar. The rapidity of its effect depends in a great degree
upon the size of the vessel wounded, and on the quantity of poison
carried into the circulation. In the first experiment, it induced
death in twenty-six minutes: in the second, which was made with the
sap collected at Púgar, in thirteen minutes. The poison from different
parts of the island has been found nearly equal in activity. The common
train of symptoms is; a trembling and shivering of the extremities,
restlessness, erection of the hair, discharges from the bowels,
drooping and faintness, slight spasms and convulsions, hasty breathing,
an increased flow of saliva, spasmodic contractions of the pectoral and
abdominal muscles, retching, vomiting, excrementitious vomiting, frothy
vomiting, great agony, laborious breathing, repeated convulsions, and
death. The effects are nearly the same on quadrupeds, in whatever part
of the body the wound is made. It sometimes acts with so much force,
that not all the symptoms enumerated are observed. In these cases,
after the premonitory symptoms (tremors, twitchings, faintness, an
increased flow of saliva), the convulsions come on suddenly, and are
quickly followed by death. The upas appears to affect quadrupeds with
nearly equal force, proportionate in some degree to their size and
disposition. To dogs it proved mortal in most experiments within an
hour; a mouse died in ten minutes; a monkey in seven; a cat in fifteen;
a buffalo, one of the largest quadrupeds of the island, died in two
hours and ten minutes.

"If the simple or unprepared sap is mixed with the extract of tobacco,
instead of the spices mentioned, it is rendered equally, perhaps more,
active. Even the pure juice, unmixed and unprepared, appears to act
with a force equal to that which has undergone the preparative process.
Birds are very differently affected by this poison. Fowls have a
peculiar capacity to resist its effects: a fowl died in twenty-four
hours after the wound; others have recovered after being partially
affected.

"The eighteenth and succeeding experiments were made with the poison
prepared from the chetik. Its operation is far more violent and
rapid than that of the anchar, and it affects the animal system in a
different manner. While the anchar operates chiefly on the stomach,
alimentary canal, the respiration and circulation, the chetik is
determined to the brain and nervous system: a relative comparison
of the appearances on dissection, demonstrates in a striking manner
the peculiar operation of each. A general view of the effects of the
chetik on quadrupeds is given in these experiments. After the previous
symptoms of faintness, drowsiness, and slight convulsions, it acts by
a sudden impulse, which like a violent apoplexy prostrates at once the
whole nervous system. In two of these experiments this sudden effect
took place in the sixth minute after the wound, in another in the
seventh minute: the animals suddenly started, fell down head foremost,
and continued in convulsions until death ensued. This poison affects
fowls in a much more violent manner than that of the anchar. They are
first affected by a heat and itching of the breast and wings, which
they shew by violently pecking those parts; this is followed by a
loose discharge from the bowels, when they are seized with tremors
and fluttering of the wings, which having continued a short time,
they fall down head foremost, and continue convulsed till death. In
some instances, particularly young fowls, the poison acts with great
rapidity; death has frequently occurred within the space of a minute
after a puncture with a poisoned dart.

"Taken into the stomach of quadrupeds, the chetik acts as a most
violent poison; but it requires about thrice the period to produce
the same effect which a wound produces. But the stomach of fowls can
resist its operation. Having mixed about double the quantity generally
adhering to a dart with the food of a fowl, it consumed it without
shewing any marks of indisposition. The poison of the anchar does by
no means act as violently on quadrupeds as that of the chetik. I have
given it to a dog: it produced at first nearly the same symptoms as
a puncture; oppression of the head, twitchings, faintness, laborious
respiration, violent contraction of the pectoral and abdominal muscles,
&c. which continued nearly two hours; but after the complete evacuation
of the stomach by vomiting, the animal gradually recovered.

"I have but little to add concerning the operation of the anchar
on the human system. The only credible information on this subject
is contained in the work of Rhumphius, who had an opportunity of
personally observing the effect of the poisoned darts and arrows as
they were used by the natives of Makasar, in their attack on Amboyna
about the year 1650. They were also employed by the inhabitants
of Celebes in their former wars with the Dutch. Speaking of their
operation he says, 'the poison touching the warm blood, it is instantly
carried through the whole body, so that it may be felt in all the
veins, and causes an excessive burning, particularly in the head,
which is followed by fainting and death.' This poison (according to
the same author) possesses different degrees of virulence, according
to its age and state of preservation. The most powerful is called upas
raja, and its effects are considered as incurable; the other kinds are
distributed among the soldiers on going to war. After having proved
mortal to many of the Dutch soldiers in Amboyna and Makasar, they
finally discovered an almost infallible remedy in the root of the radix
toxicaria of Rhumphius, which, if timely applied, counteracted, by its
violent emetic effect, the force of the upas. An intelligent Javan of
Banyuwangi informed me, that a number of years ago an inhabitant of
that district was wounded in a clandestine manner, by an arrow thrown
from a blow-pipe, in the fore-arm, near the articulation of the elbow.
In about fifteen minutes he became drowsy; after which he was seized
with vomiting, became delirious, and in less than half an hour he died.
From the experiments above related, we may form an analogous estimate
of its probable effects on man." _Batavian Transactions_, vol. vii.




CHAPTER II.

  _Origin of the Natives--Javans compared with
    Maláyus and Búgis--Comparative Progress of the
    three Races--Foreign Influence--Persons of the
    Natives--Manners--Population--Inequality of it accounted
    for--Population Tables--Increase of Population--Foreign
    Settlers--Chinese--Búgis--Maláyus--Moors--Arabs--Slaves--Gradations
    of Rank among the Javans--Their Habitations, Dress, and Food._


The inhabitants of Java seem to owe their origin to the same stock,
from which most of the islands lying to the south of the eastern
Peninsula of Asia appear to have been first peopled. This stock is
evidently Tartar, and has, by its numerous and wide-spreading branches,
not only extended itself over the Indian Archipelago, but over the
neighbouring Continent. "To judge from external appearance, that is to
say, from shape, size, and feature," observes Dr. Francis Buchanan,
in his Notices on the Birman Empire[34], "there is one very extensive
nation that inhabits the east of Asia. It includes the eastern and
western Tartars of the Chinese authors, the Calmucs, the Chinese, the
Japanese, and other tribes inhabiting what is called the Peninsula
of India beyond the Ganges, and the islands to the south and east
of this, as far at least as New Guinea."--"This nation," adds the
same author, "may be distinguished by a short, squat, robust, fleshy
stature, and by features highly different from those of an European.
The face is somewhat in shape of a lozenge, the forehead and chin being
sharpened, whilst at the cheek bones it is very broad. The eyebrows, or
superciliary ridges, in this nation, project very little, and the eyes
are very narrow, and placed rather obliquely in the head, the external
angles being the highest. The nose is very small, but has not, like
that of the negro, the appearance of being flattened, and the apertures
of the nostrils, which in the European are linear and parallel,
in them are nearly circular and divergent, for the _septum narium_
being much thickest towards the face, places them entirely out of the
parallel line. The mouths of this nation are in general well shaped;
their hair is harsh, lank, and black. Those of them that live even in
the highest climates do not obtain the deep hue of the negro or Hindu;
nor do such of them as live in the coldest climates acquire the clear
bloom of the European."

But although the Javans are to be included under this general
description, it does not follow that they bear an exact, or very
striking resemblance, in person and feature, to the Chinese or
Japanese, nor even that they are liable to be confounded with the
Birmans or Siamese. From the former, indeed, they are far removed by
many obvious characteristics; and though more nearly resembling the
latter, they possess many peculiarities, which mark them out to the
most careless observer as a race distinct and separate for ages, though
still retaining general traces of a common origin. As we approach the
limits of savage life, and recur to that inartificial, unimproved state
of society, in which the primitive divergence may be supposed to have
taken place, we shall find the points of resemblance increased, and the
proofs of a common descent multiplied. The less civilized of the tribes
inhabiting the islands, approach so nearly, in physical appearance, to
that portion of the inhabitants of the Peninsula, which has felt least
of the Chinese influence on the one side, and of the Birman and Siamese
on the other, and exhibit so striking an affinity in their usages and
customs, as to warrant the hypothesis that the tide of population
originally flowed towards the islands, from that quarter of the
Continent lying between Siam and China. But at what era this migration
commenced; whether, in the first instance, it was purely accidental
and subsequently gradual; or whether, originally, it was undertaken
from design, and accelerated, at any particular periods, by political
convulsions on the Continent, we cannot at present determine with any
certainty, as we have no data on which to rely with confidence. It
is probable, however, that the islands were peopled at a very remote
period, and long before the Birman and Siamese nations rose into
notice.

Whatever opinion may be formed on the identity of the tribes inhabiting
these Islands and the neighbouring Peninsula, the striking resemblance
in person, feature, language, and customs, which prevails throughout
the whole Archipelago, justifies the conclusion, that its original
population issued from the same source, and that the peculiarities
which distinguish the different nations and communities into which it
is at present distributed, are the result of a long separation, local
circumstances, and the intercourse of foreign traders, emigrants, or
settlers.

Excluding the Philippines, as distant from the scene of our present
observations, it may be noticed, that of the three chief nations in
these islands, occupying respectively Java, Sumatra, and Celebes, the
first has, especially by its moral habits, by its superior civilization
and improvements, obtained a broader and more marked characteristic
than the others. Both the Malayan and _Búgis_ nations are maritime and
commercial, devoted to speculations of gain, animated by a spirit of
adventure, and accustomed to distant and hazardous enterprises; while
the Javans, on the contrary, are an agricultural race, attached to
the soil, of quiet habits and contented dispositions, almost entirely
unacquainted with navigation and foreign trade, and little inclined to
engage in either. This difference of character may perhaps be accounted
for, by the great superiority of the soil of Java to that of the other
two islands.

It is to be regretted, that our information on the state and progress
of society in these islands is scanty, as Europeans only became
acquainted with them when they were on their decline. The Malayan
empire, which once extended over all Sumatra[35], and the capital of
which is still nominally at _Menáng-kábaù_ on that island, had long
been dismembered; but its colonies were found established on the
coasts of the Peninsula and throughout the Islands, as far east as
the Moluccas. The Mahometan institutions had considerably obliterated
their ancient character, and had not only obstructed their improvement,
but had accelerated their decline. Traditional history concurs with
existing monuments, in proving them to have formerly made considerable
advances in those arts, to which their industry and ingenuity were
particularly directed, and they still bear marks of that higher state
of civilization which they once enjoyed.

What the Malayan empire was on Sumatra, in the western part of the
Archipelago, that of _Guah_ or _Mengkásar_, was on Celebes in the east;
but the people of this latter nation, whom we may generally designate
by the name of _Búgis_, had not been equally influenced by foreign
settlers nor exposed to the inroads of the Arab missionaries, and
they consequently maintained their ancient worship and their native
institutions for a longer period. Like the _Maláyus_, they sent forth
numerous colonies, and at one period extended the success of their
arms as far west as Acheen on Sumatra, and _Kéddah_ on the Malayan
peninsula, and in almost every part of the Archipelago, Malayan and
_Búgis_ settlers and establishments are to be found.

The Javans, on the contrary, being an agricultural people, are
seldom met with out of their native island. At one period of their
history, indeed, their power seems to have been exerted in acquiring
or perpetuating foreign dominion, and they seem to have sent out
colonies to Borneo, the Peninsula, Sumatra, and probably Celebes: but
when Europeans became acquainted with them, their external influence
appears to have been contracted, and their sovereignty nearly confined
within the limits of Java itself. Their foreign establishments thus
receiving from them no protection, and deriving no advantage from
nominal obedience, declared their independence: and, having but little
communication with the mother-country, soon became assimilated to the
character, and merged into the body of the Malayan nation.

The comparative advancement of these three nations in the arts of
civilized life, seems to be directly as the fertility of the soil they
occupied, or the inducements they held out to foreign intercourse; and
inversely, as the indulgence of their own roving, adventurous spirit,
and piratical habits. The arts never fix their roots but in a crowded
population, and a crowded population is generally created only on a
fertile territory. Egypt, from the fertility of soil and the consequent
density of its population, led the way in science and refinement among
ancient nations; while the sterile tracts contiguous to that favoured
land have been inhabited, from primeval times, by dispersed tribes of
unimproved barbarians. In like manner, Java having become populous from
its natural fertility, and having, by its wealth and the salubrity of
its climate, invited the visits of more enlightened strangers, soon
made great progress in arts and knowledge; while the _Búgis_, being
more deficient in these advantages, have been left considerably behind
in the race of improvement. They may lay claim, however, to the most
originality of character.

It will be the object of another part of this work, to trace the
source of that foreign influence, to which these three nations are
principally indebted for their civilization: here, therefore, it
may not be necessary to advert to the circumstance further, than by
generally observing, that from western Asia they received the rudiments
and impulse of improvement; an inference abundantly justified by the
extensive remains of the arts, institutions, and languages of that
country, which are still to be found throughout the Archipelago.

The inhabitants of Java and Madúra are in stature rather below the
middle size, though not so short as the _Búgis_ and many of the
other islanders. They are, upon the whole, well shaped, though less
remarkably so than the _Maláyus_, and erect in their figures. Their
limbs are slender, and the wrists and ankles particularly small.
In general, they allow the body to retain its natural shape. The
only exceptions to this observation are, an attempt to prevent the
growth, or to reduce the size of the waist, by compressing it into
the narrowest limits; and the practice still more injurious to female
elegance, of drawing too tightly that part of the dress which covers
the bosom. Deformity is very rare among them. The forehead is high,
the eyebrows well marked and distant from the eyes, which are somewhat
Chinese, or rather Tartar, in the formation of the inner angle. The
colour of the eye is dark; the nose small and somewhat flat, but less
so than that of the islanders in general. The mouth is well formed, but
the lips are large, and their beauty generally injured by the practice
of filing and dyeing the teeth black, and by the use of tobacco,
_sári_, &c. The cheek-bones are usually prominent; the beard very
scanty; the hair of the head generally lank and black, but sometimes
waving in curls, and partially tinged with a deep reddish brown colour.
The countenance is mild, placid and thoughtful, and easily expresses
respect, gaiety, earnestness, indifference, bashfulness, or anxiety.

In complexion, the Javans, as well as the other eastern islanders,
may be considered rather as a yellow than a copper-coloured or black
race. Their standard of beauty, in this respect, is "a virgin-gold
colour:" except perhaps in some few districts in the mountainous parts
of the country, where a ruddy tinge is occasioned by the climate,
they want the degree of red requisite to give them a copperish hue.
It may be observed, however, that they are generally darker than
the tribes of the neighbouring islands; especially the inhabitants
of the eastern districts, who may indeed be considered as having
more delicate features, and bearing a more distinct impression of
Indian colonization, than those of the Western or _Súnda_ districts.
The _Súndas_ exhibit many features of a mountainous race. They are
shorter, stouter, hardier, and more active men, than the inhabitants
of the coast and eastern districts. In some respects they resemble the
Madurese, who display a more martial and independent air, and move with
a bolder carriage than the natives of Java. A considerable difference
exists in person and features between the higher and lower classes;
more indeed than seems attributable to difference of employment and
treatment. The features and limbs of the chiefs are more delicate, and
approach more nearly to those of the inhabitants of Western India,
while those of the common people retain more marked traces of the stock
from which the islands were originally peopled. In colour there are
many different shades in different families and different districts,
some being much darker than others. Among many of the chiefs a strong
mixture of the Chinese is clearly discernible: the Arab features are
seldom found, except among the priests, and some few families of the
highest rank.

The women, in general, are not so good-looking as the men: and to
Europeans many of them, particularly when advanced in years, appear
hideously ugly. But among the lower orders, much of this deficiency of
personal comeliness is doubtless to be attributed to the severe duties
which they have to perform in the field, to the hardships they have to
undergo in carrying oppressive burdens, and to exposure in a sultry
climate. On the neighbouring island of _Báli_, where the condition
of the women among the peasantry does not appear by any means so
oppressed and degraded, they exhibit considerable personal beauty; and
even on Java, the higher orders of them being kept within-doors, have a
very decided superiority in this respect.

In manners the Javans are easy and courteous, and respectful even to
timidity; they have a great sense of propriety, and are never rude or
abrupt. In their deportment they are pliant and graceful, the people
of condition carrying with them a considerable air of fashion, and
receiving the gaze of the curious without being at all disconcerted.
In their delivery they are in general very circumspect and even slow,
though not deficient in animation when necessary.

Here, as on Sumatra, there are certain mountainous districts, in which
the people are subject to those large wens in the throat, termed in
Europe _goitres_. The cause is generally ascribed by the natives to the
quality of the water; but there seems good ground for concluding, that
it is rather to be traced to the atmosphere. In proof of this it may
be mentioned, that there is a village near the foot of the _Teng'gar_
mountains, in the eastern part of the island, where every family is
afflicted by this malady, while in another village, situated at a
greater elevation, and through which the stream descends which serves
for the use of both, there exists no such deformity. These wens are
considered hereditary in some families, and seem thus independent of
situation. A branch of the family of the present _Adipáti_ of _Bándung_
is subject to them, and it is remarkable that they prevail chiefly
among the women in that family. They neither produce positive suffering
nor occasion early death, and may be considered rather as deformities
than diseases. It is never attempted to remove them.

The population of Java is very unequally distributed, whether we
consider the fertility or the extent of the districts over which it is
spread. The great mass of it lies in the eastern and native districts,
as will be perceived from the annexed tables.

The table No. I., is compiled from materials collected by a committee
appointed on the first establishment of the British government, to
enquire and report on the state of the country. It will be found to
illustrate, in some degree, the proportionate numbers of the different
ranks and classes of society in the island. Beyond this, however, it
cannot be depended upon, as the returns of which it is an abstract were
made at a period when the Dutch system of administration provisionally
remained in force; and every new enquiry into the state of the country
being at that time considered by the people as a prelude to some
new tax or oppression, it became an object with them to conceal the
full extent of the population: accordingly it was found to differ
essentially in amount from the results of information subsequently
obtained on the introduction of the detailed land-revenue settlement,
when an agreement with each individual cultivator becoming necessary
to the security of his possession, he seldom failed to satisfy the
necessary enquiries. The table No. II., here exhibited, at least as
far as regards the European provinces, may therefore be considered as
faithful a view of the population of the country as could be expected,
and as such, notwithstanding the inaccuracies to which all such
accounts are liable, it is presented with some confidence to the public.

It was formed in the following manner. A detailed account of the
peasantry of each village was first taken, containing the name of
each male inhabitant, with other particulars, and from the aggregate
of these village lists a general statement was constructed of the
inhabitants of each subdivision and district. An abstract was again
drawn up from these provincial accounts, exhibiting the state of each
residency in which the districts were respectively included, and the
totals of these last, collected into one tabular view, constitute the
present abstract. The labour of this detailed survey was considerable,
for as each individual cultivator was to receive a lease corresponding
with the register taken, it was necessary that the land he rented
should be carefully measured and assessed[36].

                                  No. II.

         TABLE _exhibiting the_ POPULATION _of_ JAVA _and_ MADURA,
         _according to a Census taken by the_ BRITISH GOVERNMENT,
                            _in the Year_ 1815.

  +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |       DIVISIONS.       |   Total   |    Males. |  Females. |
  |                        | Population|           |           +
  |                        |           |           |           |
  |                        |           |           |           |
  |                        |           |           |           |
  +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |  _European Provinces._ |           |           |           |
  |Bantam                  |    231,604|    106,100|    125,504|
  |Batavia and its Environs|    332,015|    180,768|    151,247|
  |Buitenzorg              |     76,312|     38,926|     37,386|
  |Priángen Regencies      |    243,628|    120,649|    122,979|
  |Chéribon                |    216,001|    105,451|    110,550|
  |Tégal                   |    178,415|     81,539|     96,876|
  |Pakalúng'an             |    115,442|     53,187|     62,255|
  |Semárang                |    327,610|    165,009|    162,601|
  |Kedú                    |    197,310|     97,744|     99,566|
  |Grobógan and Jípang     |     66,522|     31,693|     34,829|
  |Japára and Jawána       |    103,290|     55,124|     48,166|
  |Rémbang                 |    158,530|     75,204|     83,326|
  |Grésik                  |    115,442|     58,981|     56,461|
  |Surabáya                |    154,512|     77,260|     77,252|
  |Pasúruan                |    108,812|     54,177|     54,635|
  |Probolíng'go            |    104,359|     50,503|     53,856|
  |Banyuwángi              |      8,873|      4,463|      4,410|
  |   _Native Provinces._  |           |           |           |
  |Súra-kérta              |    972,727|    471,505|    501,222|
  |Yúgya-kérta[37]         |    685,207|    332,241|    352,966|
  |         MADURA.        |           |           |           |
  |Bankálang and Pamakásan |     95,235|     47,466|     47,769|
  |Súmenap                 |    123,424|     60,190|     63,234|
  +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |            Grand Total |  4,615,270|  2,268,180|  2,347,090|
  |                        |           |           |           |
  |                        |           |           |           |
                           +-----------+-----------+-----------+

  +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |       DIVISIONS.       |             NATIVES.              |
  |                        +-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |                        |   Total   |  Males.   |  Females. |
  |                        |  Natives. |           |           |
  |                        |           |           |           |
  +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |  _European Provinces._ |           |           |           |
  |Bantam                  |    230,976|    111,988|    118,988|
  |Batavia and its Environs|    279,621|    151,064|    128,557|
  |Buitenzorg              |     73,679|     37,334|     36,345|
  |Priángen Regencies      |    243,268|    120,289|    122,979|
  |Chéribon                |    213,658|     99,837|    113,821|
  |Tégal                   |    175,446|     80,208|     95,238|
  |Pakalúng'an             |    113,396|     52,007|     61,389|
  |Semárang                |    305,910|    154,161|    151,749|
  |Kedú                    |    196,171|     97,167|     99,004|
  |Grobógan and Jípang     |     66,109|     31,423|     34,686|
  |Japára and Jawána       |    101,000|     54,000|     47,000|
  |Rémbang                 |    154,639|     73,373|     81,266|
  |Grésik                  |    115,078|     58,807|     56,271|
  |Surabáya                |    152,025|     76,038|     75,987|
  |Pasúruan                |    107,752|     53,665|     54,087|
  |Probolíng'go            |    102,927|     49,797|     53,130|
  |Banyuwángi              |      8,554|      4,297|      4,257|
  |   _Native Provinces._  |           |           |           |
  |Súra-kérta              |    970,292|    470,220|    500,072|
  |Yúgya-kérta[37]         |    683,005|    331,141|    351,864|
  |         MADURA.        |           |           |           |
  |Bankálang and Pamakásan |     90,848|     45,194|     45,654|
  |Súmenap                 |    114,896|     55,826|     59,070|
  +------------------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
  |            Grand Total |  4,499,250|  2,207,836|  2,291,414|
  |                        |           |           |           |
  |                        |           |           |           |
                           +-----------+-----------+-----------+

  +------------------------+---------+--------+---------+
  |       DIVISIONS.       |        CHINESE, &c.        |
  |                        +---------+--------+---------+
  |                        |  Total  | Males. | Females.|
  |                        | Chinese,|        |         |
  |                        |   &c.   |        |         |
  +------------------------+---------+--------+---------+
  |  _European Provinces._ |         |        |         |
  |Bantam                  |      628|     352|      276|
  |Batavia and its Environs|   52,394|  29,704|   22,690|
  |Buitenzorg              |    2,633|   1,591|    1,042|
  |Priángen Regencies      |      180|      86|       94|
  |Chéribon                |    2,343|   1,193|    1,150|
  |Tégal                   |    2,004|     915|    1,089|
  |Pakalúng'an             |    2,046|   1,180|      866|
  |Semárang                |    1,700|     848|      852|
  |Kedú                    |    1,139|     577|      562|
  |Grobógan and Jípang     |      403|     223|      180|
  |Japára and Jawána       |    2,290|   1,124|    1,166|
  |Rémbang                 |    3,891|   1,831|    2,060|
  |Grésik                  |      364|     174|      190|
  |Surabáya                |    2,047|   1,010|    1,037|
  |Pasúruan                |    1,070|     522|      548|
  |Probolíng'go            |    1,430|     706|      724|
  |Banyuwángi              |      319|     166|      153|
  |   _Native Provinces._  |         |        |         |
  |Súra-kérta              |    2,435|   1,285|    1,150|
  |Yúgya-kérta[37]         |    2,202|   1,201|    1,001|
  |         MADURA.        |         |        |         |
  |Bankálang and Pamakásan |    4,395|   2,280|    2,115|
  |Súmenap                 |    8,528|   4,364|    4,164|
  +------------------------+---------+--------+---------+
  |            Grand Total |   94,441|  51,332|   43,109|
  |                        |         |        |         |
  |                        |         |        |         |
                           +---------+--------+---------+

  +------------------------+-----------+----------------------+
  |       DIVISIONS.       |   Square  |      Estimated       |
  |                        +  statute  |     Population       |
  |                        |   Miles.  |        to a          |
  |                        |           |     square Mile.     |
  |                        |           |                      |
  +------------------------+-----------+----------------------+
  |  _European Provinces._ |           |                      |
  |Bantam                  |      3,428|      67½             |
  |Batavia and its Environs|}     2,411|     169⅓             |
  |Buitenzorg              |}          |                      |
  |Priángen Regencies      |     10,002|      24⅓             |
  |Chéribon                |      1,334|     162              |
  |Tégal                   |      1,297|     137⅓             |
  |Pakalúng'an             |        607|     190⅙             |
  |Semárang                |      1,166|     281              |
  |Kedú                    |        826|     238¾             |
  |Grobógan and Jípang     |      1,219|      54⅓             |
  |Japára and Jawána       |      1,025|     100⅔             |
  |Rémbang                 |      1,400|     113              |
  |Grésik                  |        778|     148              |
  |Surabáya                |      1,218|     126¾             |
  |Pasúruan                |      1,952|      58⅛             |
  |Probolíng'go            |      2,854|      36½             |
  |Banyuwángi              |      1,274|       7              |
  |   _Native Provinces._  |           |                      |
  |Súra-kérta              |} 11,313   |     147½             |
  |Yúgya-kérta[37]         |}          |                      |
  |         MADURA.        |           |                      |
  |Bankálang and Pamakásan |        892|     106¾             |
  |Súmenap                 |    728[38]|     146              |
  +------------------------+ ----------+----------------------+
  |            Grand Total |     45,794| Average Population   |
  |                        |           | rather exceeding 100 |
  |                        |           | to a square mile     |
                           +-----------+----------------------+

  MEM.--The Population of the principal European capitals included in the
  above, is estimated as follows:--

  Batavia and its immediate Suburbs  60,000
  Semárang                           20,000
  Surabáya                           25,000

  The population of _Súra-kérta_, the principal Native capital, is
  estimated at 105,000.

  That of _Yúgya-kérta_ at somewhat less.

By the last table, it appears that in some districts the population
is in the ratio of two hundred and eighty-one to a square mile, while
in others it is not more than twenty-four and three quarters: in the
districts of _Banyuwángí_ it is even as low as seven. The soil in
the eastern districts is generally considered superior to that in
the western, and this circumstance, added to the superior facilities
which they afford to commerce, may serve to account for their original
selection as the chief seat of the native government, and consequently
for their denser population at an early period.

This disproportion was also promoted by the policy of the Dutch
Company. The Dutch first established themselves in the western
division, and having no confidence in the natives, endeavoured to drive
them from the vicinity of Batavia, with the view of establishing round
their metropolis an extensive and desert barrier. The forced services
and forced deliveries, which extended wherever Dutch influence could
be felt, and of which more will be said hereafter, contributed to
impoverish, and thereby to depopulate the country. The drain also of
the surrounding districts, to supply the place of the multitudes who
perished by the unhealthy climate of Batavia, must have been enormous;
and if to these we add the checks to population, which were created
over Bantam, the _Priáng'en_ Regencies, and Chéribon, in the pepper
and coffee cultivation, of the nature of which an account will be
given when treating of the agriculture of the country, we need go no
further to account for the existing disproportion. It was only about
sixty years ago that the Dutch government first obtained a decided
influence in the eastern districts, and from that moment, the provinces
subjected to its authority ceased to improve, and extensive emigrations
took place into the dominions of the native princes. Such were the
effects of this desolating system, that the population of the province
of _Banyuwángi_, which in 1750 is said to have amounted to upwards of
eighty thousand souls, was in 1811 reduced to eight thousand.

The _Priáng'en_ Regencies, from their inland situation and mountainous
character, may probably have at all times been less closely peopled
than other parts of the island, and their insufficient population
would furnish no proofs of the oppressions of government, did we not
observe extensive tracts, nay whole districts, exhibiting the traces
of former cultivation, now lying waste and overgrown with long rank
grass. Chéribon and Bantam have shared the same fate. These provinces,
according to authentic accounts, were at the period of the first
establishment of the European government, among the richest and most
populous of the island. In 1811 they were found in a state of extreme
poverty, affording little or no revenue, and distracted by all the
aggravated miseries of continued insurrections.

If we look at Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, the capitals of the British
government in India: if we look at the great cities of every nation
in Europe; nay, if we even confine ourselves to the capitals of the
native princes on Java, we shall find that population has always
accumulated in their vicinity. And why was not this the case with the
Dutch capital? The climate alone will not explain it. Bad government
was the principal cause; a system of policy which secured neither
person nor property--selfish, jealous, vexatious, and tyrannical. It
is no less true than remarkable, that wherever the Dutch influence has
prevailed in the Eastern Seas, depopulation has followed. The Moluccas
particularly have suffered at least as much as any part of Java, and
the population of those Islands, reduced as it is, has been equally
oppressed and degraded.

It was fortunate for the interests of humanity, and for the importance
of Java, that the native governments were less oppressive than the
sway of their European conquerors, and that their states afforded a
retreat from a more desolating tyranny. It has been ascertained, that,
on the first establishment of the Dutch in the eastern part of the
Island, the inhabitants of whole districts at once migrated into the
native provinces. Every new act of rigour, every unexpected exaction,
occasioned a further migration, and cultivation was transferred to
tracts which had previously scarcely a family on them. This state of
things continued down to the latest date of the Dutch government.
During the administration of Marshal Daendels, in the years 1808, 1809,
and 1810, nearly all the inhabitants of the province of _Demák_, one of
the richest in the eastern districts, fled into the native provinces;
and when an order was given for the rigid enforcement of the coffee
monopoly, every district suffered in its population, in proportion to
the extent of service levied upon it. Of the sacrifice of lives by
thousands and tens of thousands, to fill the ranks of the Dutch native
army, and to construct roads and public works, we shall speak more at
large hereafter.

The total population of Java and Madúra appears from the Table No. II.,
to amount to 4,615,270, of which about four millions and a half may be
considered as the indigenous population of the country, and the rest as
foreign settlers. Itinerants, who are principally found along the coast
in the different maritime and commercial capitals, are not included;
neither is the nautical population, which cannot be estimated at less
than 30,000 souls; so that the whole population of these two islands
may, perhaps, be taken in round numbers at not much less than five
millions. Of these not less than three millions are in the provinces
immediately subject to European authority, and upwards of a million and
a half in the provinces of the native princes.

While the British were in possession of Java, there is reason to
believe that the population of the Island was rapidly increasing;
that of the provinces immediately under the European authority was
certainly augmented by the return of numerous families from emigration:
but previously to that period, no such authentic registers were kept
as might enable us to ascertain with precision the variations in the
number of the inhabitants during the Dutch government.

Nothing can more completely shew the vague and defective information
formerly attainable on this subject, than the loose and contradictory
statements published by those who took most pains to be well informed,
and who felt it their duty to collect all the light that could
be attained. In some accounts which have met the public eye, the
population of Java is placed on a level with that of the most powerful
European states, and assumed as high as thirty millions, while in
others, where one would expect more accuracy[39], it is rated at only
a million. The most respectable authorities[40] state the population
about a century ago at three millions; but the slightest reflection
will convince us, that such an estimate must have proceeded upon data
merely conjectural, for from our knowledge of the Dutch maxims of
administration we may safely say, that until very lately, they never
thought it an object to prosecute statistic enquiries, and that if ever
they had done so, under the old system, they could have obtained no
results deserving of confidence or credit.

About the year 1750, a certain number of families were assigned by the
stipulations of a treaty to one of the native princes[41]; and on his
death, about thirty years afterwards, when an account was taken of this
population, it appeared that the number of families had nearly doubled.
But this increase cannot be taken as the average increase of the
Island, for at this period the native provinces received a considerable
accession to their numbers, in consequence of the emigrations from the
Dutch territories.

If any inference can be drawn from this and other corresponding
circumstances, it would seem, that notwithstanding the drains on the
existing race, and the preventive checks to an increase, which were
experienced during the latter years of the Dutch administration, the
island was actually more populous in 1811, when it was surrendered to
the British, than in 1750, when at the termination of a destructive
war, the Dutch acquired the greatest portion of it from the natives.

To support the opinion of an increase within the last half century
(which is every where asserted) we have the assurance, that during that
period the greatest internal tranquillity prevailed in the provinces
subject to native administration; that no years of scarcity and famine
were experienced, and that the island was blessed with genial seasons
and abundance of subsistence. But to place in the opposite scale, we
have the government oppressions to which we formerly alluded, and which
one would suppose sufficient to counteract the natural tendency of
these advantages. As demonstrative of the strength of that principle
of population, which could even maintain its stationary amount in
conflict with political drains and discouragements, it may be proper
to mention cursorily a few of them. Great demands were, at all times,
made on the peasantry of the island, to recruit the ranks of the Dutch
army, and to supply the many other wants of the public service; the
severities and consequent mortality to which the troops were liable,
may be calculated, from the reluctance of the unfortunate wretches,
selected as victims of military conscription, to engage in the duties
of a military life. Confined in unhealthy garrisons, exposed to
unnecessary hardships and privations, extraordinary casualties took
place among them, and frequent new levies became necessary, while
the anticipation of danger and suffering produced an aversion to the
service, which was only aggravated by the subsequent measures of
cruelty and oppression. The conscripts raised in the provinces were
usually sent to the metropolis by water; and though the distance be
but short between any two points of the island, a mortality, similar
to that of a slave-ship in the middle passage, took place on board
these receptacles of reluctant recruits. They were generally confined
in the stocks till their arrival at Batavia, and it is calculated
that for every man that entered the army and performed the duties of
a soldier, several lives were lost. Besides the supply of the army,
one half of the male population of the country was constantly held
in readiness for other public services; and thus a great portion of
the effective hands were taken from their families, and detained at a
distance from home, in labours which broke their spirit and exhausted
their strength. During the administration of Marshal Daendels, it has
been calculated that the construction of public roads alone, destroyed
the lives of at least ten thousand workmen. The transport of government
stores, and the capricious requisitions of government agents of all
classes, perpetually harassed, and frequently carried off numbers of
the people. If to these drains we add the waste of life occasioned
by insurrections, which tyranny and impolicy excited and fomented in
Chéribon, the blighting effects of the coffee monopoly, and forced
services in the _Priáng'en_ Regencies, and the still more desolating
operation of the policy pursued and consequent anarchy produced in the
province of Bantam, we shall have some idea of the depopulating causes
that existed under the Dutch administration, and the force of that
tendency to increase, which could overcome obstacles so powerful.

Most of these drains and checks were removed during the short period of
British administration; but it is to be regretted (so far as accurate
data on this subject would be desirable) that there was not time to
learn satisfactorily the result of a different system, or to institute
the proper registers, by which alone questions of population can be
determined. The only document of that kind, to which I can venture
to refer as authentic, is a statement of the births and deaths that
occurred in the given general population of the _Priáng'en_ Regencies
for one year. From this account it would appear, that even in these
Regencies, where, if we except Batavia, the checks to population
are allowed to be greater than elsewhere, the births were to the
total existing population as 1 to 39, and the deaths as 1 to 40 very
nearly; that the births exceed the deaths by 618, or about 1 in 40,
in a population of 232,000, and that, at that rate, the population
would double itself in three hundred and seventy-five years. A slow
increase, certainly, compared with England, where the births, in the
three years ending 1800, were to the persons alive as 1 in 36, and the
deaths as 1 to 49, and where, consequently, the nation would double
itself in one hundred and sixty years (or taking the enumeration of
1811 as more correct, where the population would be doubled in eighty
years): but not much slower than that of France, where, according to
the statements of numbers in 1700 and 1790, about three hundred years
would be required to double the inhabitants. It has been estimated that
the population in some more favourable districts would double itself in
fifty years. One inference cannot fail to be drawn from the register to
which I have referred; that the births and deaths, though they nearly
approach each other, are low, compared with the existing numbers; and
that, consequently, the climate is healthy, and the marriages not very
prolific, as far as this district is concerned.

In the absence of authentic documents, which would have enabled us to
resolve many interesting questions regarding the population, such as
the number of children to a marriage, the ordinary length of life, the
proportion of children that die in infancy and at the other stages
of life, the ratio between the births and deaths, and the consequent
rate of increase, the effect of polygamy and multiplied divorces, the
comparative healthiness of the towns and the villages, and several
others,--I shall state a few observations on some of these heads, and
a few facts tending to shew, that under a better system of government,
or by the removal of a few of the checks that previously existed, Java
might, in a short time, be expected to be better peopled.

The soil is in general extremely fertile, and can be brought to yield
its produce with little labour. Many of the best spots still remain
uncultivated, and several districts are almost desert and neglected,
which might be the seats of a crowded and happy peasantry. In many
places, the land does not require to be cleared, as in America, from
the overgrown vegetation of primeval forests, but offers its services
to the husbandman, almost free from every obstruction to his immediate
labours. The agricultural life in which the mass of the people are
engaged, is on Java, as in every other country, the most favourable to
health. It not only favours the longevity of the existing race, but
conduces to its more rapid renewal, by leading to early marriages and a
numerous progeny. The term of life is not much shorter than in the best
climates of Europe. A very considerable number of persons of both sexes
attain the advanced age of seventy or eighty, and some even live to
one hundred and upwards; nearly the same proportion survive forty and
fifty, as in other genial climates.

While life is thus healthy and prolonged, there are no restraints upon
the formation of family connexions, by the scarcity of subsistence
or the labour of supporting children. Both sexes arrive at maturity
very early, and the customs of the country, as well as the nature of
the climate, impel them to marry young; the males at sixteen, and the
females at thirteen or fourteen years of age: though frequently the
women form connexions at nine or ten, and, as Montesquieu expresses it,
"infancy and marriage go together." The conveniences which the married
couple require are few and easily procured. The impulse of nature is
seldom checked by the experience of present deficiencies, or the fear
of future poverty. Subsistence is procured without difficulty, and
comforts are not wanting. Children, who are for a very short period a
burden to their parents, become early the means of assistance and the
source of wealth. To the peasant who labours his field with his own
hand, and who has more land than he can bring into cultivation, they
grow up into a species of valuable property, a real treasure; while,
during their infancy and the season of helplessness, they take little
from the fruits of his industry but bare subsistence.

Their education costs him little or nothing; scarcely any clothing is
required, his hut needs very little enlargement, and no beds are used.
Many of them die in infancy from the small-pox and other distempers,
but never from scanty food or criminal neglect of parents. The women of
all classes suckle their children, till we ascend to the wives of the
regents and of the sovereign, who employ nurses.

Though women soon arrive at maturity, and enter early into the married
state, they continue to bear children to an advanced age, and it is
no uncommon thing to see a grandmother still making addition to her
family. Great families are however rare. Though there are some women
who have borne thirteen or fourteen children, the average is rather
low than otherwise. A _chácha_, or family, is generally less numerous
than in Europe, both from the circumstance that the young men and women
more early leave the houses of their parents to form establishments
for themselves, and from an injudicious mode of labouring among women
of the lower ranks. Miscarriages among the latter are frequently
caused by over-straining themselves in carrying excessive burdens, and
performing oppressive field-work, during pregnancy. The average number
of persons in a family does not exceed four, or four and a half. As
the labour of the women is almost equally productive with that of the
men, female children become as much objects of solicitude with their
parents as male: they are nursed with the same care, and viewed with
the same pride and tenderness. In no class of society are children of
either sex considered as an incumbrance, or the addition to a family as
a misfortune; marriage is therefore almost universal. An unmarried man
past twenty is seldom to be met with, and an old maid is considered a
curiosity. Neither custom, law, or religion, enjoins celibacy on the
priesthood, or any other order of the community, and by none of them is
it practised. Although no strictness of principle, nor strong sense of
moral restraint, prevails in the intercourse of the sexes, prostitution
is not common, except in the capitals.

As the Javans are a quiet domestic people, little given to adventure,
disinclined to foreign enterprise, not easily roused to violence or
bloodshed, and little disposed to irregularities of any kind, there
are but few families left destitute in consequence of hazards incurred
or crimes committed by their natural protectors. The character of
blood-thirsty revenge, which has been attributed to all the inhabitants
of the Indian Archipelago, by no means applies to the people of Java;
and though, in all cases where justice is badly administered or
absolutely perverted, people may be expected to enforce their rights
or redress their grievances, rather by their own passions than by an
appeal to the magistrate, comparatively few lives are lost on the
island by personal affrays or private feuds.

Such are a few of the circumstances that would appear to have
encouraged an increase of population on Java. They furnish no precise
data on which to estimate its rapidity, or to calculate the period
within which it would be doubled, but they allow us, if tranquillity
and good government were enjoyed, to anticipate a gradual progress in
the augmentation of inhabitants, and the improvements of the soil for
a long course of time. Suppose the quantity of land in cultivation to
be to the land still in a state of nature as one to seven, which is
probably near the truth, and that, in the ordinary circumstances of the
country, the population would double itself in a century, it might go
on increasing for three hundred years to come. Afterwards the immense
tracts of unoccupied or thinly peopled territories on Sumatra, Borneo,
and the numerous islands scattered over the Archipelago, may be ready
to receive colonies, arts, and civilization from the metropolis of the
Indian seas. Commercial intercourse, friendly relations, or political
institutions, may bind these dispersed communities in one great insular
commonwealth. Its trade and navigation might connect the centre of
this great empire with Japan, China, and the south-western countries
of Asia. New Holland, which the adventurous _Búgis_ already frequent,
and which is not so far distant from Java as Russia is from England,
might be included in the circle, and colonies of Javans settled on the
north, might meet with the British spreading from the south, over that
immense and now uncultivated region. If we could indulge ourselves
in such reveries with propriety, we might contemplate the present
semi-barbarous condition, ignorance, and poverty of these innumerable
islands, exchanged for a state of refinement, prosperity, and happiness.

I formerly alluded to the oppressions of government, as the principal
checks to the increase of population on Java. There are many others,
such as the small-pox, and other diseases, which are common to that
country with the rest of the world. From the scattered state of
the population, any contagious distemper, such as the small-pox,
was formerly less destructive on Java, than in countries where the
inhabitants are more crowded into large towns, and it is hoped that,
from the establishment for vaccine inoculation which the British
government erected, and endeavoured to render permanent, its ravages
may, in time, be entirely arrested. The diseases most peculiar to the
country, and most dangerous at all ages, are fevers and dysenteries:
epidemics are rare. There are two moral causes which, on their first
mention, will strike every one as powerfully calculated to counteract
the principle of population: I mean the facility of obtaining divorces,
and the practice of polygamy. A greater weight should not, however,
be given them than they deserve after a consideration of all the
circumstances. It is true, that separations often take place on the
slightest grounds, and new connexions are formed with equal frivolity
and caprice; but in whatever light morality would view this practice,
and however detrimental it would be to population in a different state
of society, by leaving the children of the marriage so dissolved to
neglect and want, it has no such consequences on Java. Considering
the age at which marriages are usually contracted, the choice of the
parties cannot be always expected to be considerate or judicious. It
may be observed also that the women, although they do not appear old at
twenty, as Montesquieu remarks, certainly sooner lose that influence
over their husbands, which depends upon their beauty and personal
attractions, than they do in colder climates. In addition to this,
there is little moral restraint among many classes of the community,
and the religious maxims and indulgences acted upon by the priesthood,
in regulating matrimonial sanctions, have no tendency to produce
constancy, or to repress inclination. Dissolutions of marriage are,
therefore, very frequent, and obtained upon the slightest pretences;
but, as children are always valuable, and as there is very little
trouble in rearing or providing for them, no change of mate, in either
party, leads to their abandonment or neglect. Indeed, the ease of
supporting children, which renders the practice less detrimental to
the increase of population, may be one of the principal causes why it
is generally followed and so little checked. No professed prostitution
or promiscuous intercourse is the consequence of this weakness of the
nuptial tie. It is rather brittle than loose; it is easily dissolved,
but while it remains it generally insures fidelity.

Polygamy, though in all cases it must be injurious to population
and happiness, so far as it goes, is permitted on Java, as in other
Mahomedan countries, by religion and law, but not practiced to any
great extent. Perhaps the ease of obtaining matrimonial separations,
by admitting of successive changes of wives, diminishes the desire of
possessing more than one at a time.

It is plain, likewise, that whatever be the law, the great body of
the people must have only one wife; and that, where there is nearly
an equality of number between the sexes, inequality of wealth or
power alone can create an unequal distribution of women. On Java,
accordingly, only the chiefs and the sovereign marry more than one
wife. All the chiefs, from the regents downwards, can only, by the
custom of the country, have two; the sovereign alone has four. The
regents, however, have generally three or four concubines, and the
sovereign eight or ten. Some of the chiefs have an extraordinary
number of children; the late Regent of _Túban_ is reputed to have
been the father of no fewer than sixty-eight. Such appropriations of
numerous women as wives or concubines, were owing to the political
power of native authorities over the inferior classes; and as, by
the new system, that power is destroyed, the evil may to a certain
extent be checked. If we were to depend upon the statement of a writer
whom Montesquieu refers to, that in Bantam there were ten women to
one man, we should be led to conclude with him, that here was a case
particularly favourable to polygamy, and that such an institution was
here an appointment of nature, intended for the multiplication of
the species, rather than an abuse contributing to check it. There is
not the least foundation, however, for the report. The proportion
of males and females born in Bantam, and over the whole of Java, is
nearly the same as in Europe, and as we find generally to exist,
wherever accurate statements can be obtained. From the information
collected in a very careful surrey of one part of the very province in
question, the preponderance seemed to be on the side of male children
to an extraordinary degree; the male children being about forty-two
thousand, and the females only thirty-five thousand five hundred.
There were formerly, it is true, great drains on the male population,
to which I have before alluded, and which, in the advanced stages
of life, might turn the balance on the other side; but as they were
never so destructive as to render polygamy a political institution,
so that institution was not carried to such an extent, as to render
it a peculiar obstacle to the progress of population. Upon the whole,
we may conclude that in Java, under a mild government, there is a
great tendency to an increase in the number of inhabitants, and to the
consequent improvement and importance of the island.

Besides the natives, whose numbers, circumstances, and character I
have slightly mentioned, there is on Java a rapidly increasing race
of foreigners, who have emigrated from the different surrounding
countries. The most numerous and important class of these is the
Chinese, who already do not fall far short of a hundred thousand; and
who, with a system of free trade and free cultivation, would soon
accumulate tenfold, by natural increase within the island, and gradual
accessions of new settlers from home. They reside principally in the
three capitals of Batavia, _Samárang_, and _Surabáya_, but they are to
be found in all the smaller capitals, and scattered over most parts of
the country. A great proportion of them are descended from families
who have been many generations on the island. Additions are gradually
making to their numbers. They arrive at Batavia from China, to the
amount of a thousand and more annually, in Chinese junks, carrying
three, four, and five hundred each, without money or resources; but,
by dint of their industry, soon acquire comparative opulence. There
are no women on Java who come directly from China; but as the Chinese
often marry the daughters of their countrymen by Javan women, there
results a numerous mixed race, which is often scarcely distinguishable
from the native Chinese. The Chinese on their arrival generally marry
a Javan woman, or purchase a slave from the other islands. The progeny
from this connexion, or what may be termed the cross breed between the
Chinese and Javans, are called in the Dutch accounts _pernákans_. Many
return to China annually in the junks, but by no means in the same
numbers as they arrive.

The Chinese, in all matters of inheritance and minor affairs, are
governed by their own laws, administered by their own chiefs, a captain
and several lieutenants being appointed by government for each society
of them. They are distinct from the natives, and are in a high degree
more intelligent, more laborious, and more luxurious. They are the life
and soul of the commerce of the country. In the native provinces they
are still farmers of the revenue, having formerly been so throughout
the island.

Although still numerous, they are considered to have much decreased
since the civil war in 1742, during which not only a large proportion
of the Chinese population was massacred by the Dutch in the town of
Batavia, but a decree of extermination was proclaimed against them
throughout the island.

The natives of the Coromandel and Malabar coast, who reside on Java,
are usually termed Moors. They appear to be the remnant of a once
extensive class of settlers; but their numbers have considerably
decreased, since the establishment of the Dutch monopoly, and the
absolute extinction of the native trade with India, which we have
reason to believe was once very extensive. Trading vessels, in
considerable numbers, still continue to proceed from the Coromandel
coast to Sumatra, Penang, and Malacca, but they no longer frequent Java.

_Búgis_ and _Maláyus_ are established in all the maritime capitals of
Java. They have their own quarter of the town allotted to them, in the
same manner as the Chinese, and are subject to the immediate authority
of their respective captains.

Among the Arabs are many merchants, but the majority are priests. Their
principal resort is _Grésik_, the spot where Mahomedanism was first
extensively planted on Java. They are seldom of genuine Arab birth, but
mostly a mixed race, between the Arabs and the natives of the islands.

There is another class of inhabitants, either foreigners themselves,
or the immediate descendants of foreigners, whose peculiar situation
and considerable numbers entitle them to some notice in the general
sketch of the population: I mean the class of slaves. The native
Javans are never reduced to this condition; or if they should happen
to be seized and sold by pirates, a satisfactory proof of their origin
would be sufficient to procure their enfranchisement. The slave
merchants have therefore been under the necessity of resorting to the
neighbouring islands for a supply, and the greatest number have been
procured from _Báli_ and Celebes. The total amount may be estimated at
about thirty thousand. According to the returns obtained in 1814, it
appeared that the following were the numbers in the principal divisions
of the island.

  At Batavia and its environs         18,972
  In the Semárang division             4,488
  In the Surabáya division             3,682
                                     -------
                               Total  27,142
                                     -------

These slaves are the property of the Europeans and Chinese alone: the
native chiefs never require the services of slaves, or engage in the
traffic of slavery. The Mahomedan laws, which regulate their civil
condition, and permit this abomination in all its extent, are modified
by the milder prejudices and more humane temper of the country. The
Dutch, who, like us, valued themselves on their political liberty, are
here the great promoters of civil servitude, and carried with them into
their eastern empire, the Roman law regarding slavery in all its extent
and rigour. But although they adopted principles that admitted of the
most cruel and wanton treatment of slaves, I would not be understood
to say, that they carried these principles into common practice. The
contrary was almost universally the case, and the condition of slaves
on Java, where they were employed principally in domestic offices,
formed a complete contrast to the state of those employed in the West
India plantations. It is remarked by Montesquieu, that "in despotic
countries, the condition of a slave is hardly more burdensome than that
of a subject," and such has been the case in Java. The grounds on which
the Dutch justified the practice of making slaves, was not that they
could not command the services of the natives with a sway sufficiently
absolute, and that they were compelled to seek, beyond the limits of
the island, for unfortunate agents to perform what the natives shewed
a reluctance
